So he sent the word to slay 
And slew the little childer. 
I doubt whether we are sufficiently attentive to the importance of elementary text 
books. That is why I have chosen as the starting-point for these lectures a Uttle 
book on English intended for 'boys and girls in the upper forms of schools'. I do 
not think the authors of this book (there were two of them) intended any harm, 
and I owe them, or their publisher, good language for sending me a 
compUmentary copy. At the same time I shall have nothing good to say of them. 
Here is a pretty predicament. I do not want to pillory two modest practising 
schoolmasters who were doing the best they knew: but I cannot be silent about 
what I think the actual tendency of their work. I therefore propose to conceal their 
names. I shall refer to these gentlemen as Gains and Titius and to their book as 
The Green Book. But I promise you there is such a book and I have it on my 
shelves. 
In their second chapter Gains and Titius quote the well-known story of Coleridge 
at the waterfall. You remember that there were two tourists present: that one 
called it 'sublime' and the other 'pretty'; and that Coleridge mentally endorsed the 
first judgement and rejected the second with disgust. Gains and Titius comment 
as follows: 'When the man said This is sublime., he appeared to be making a remark 
about the waterfall... Actually ... he was not making a remark about the waterfall, 
but a remark about his own feeUngs. What he was saying was really / have feelings 
associated in my mind with the word " Sublime" i or shortly, I have sublime feelings' Yitrt 
are a good many deep questions settled in a pretty summary fashion. But the 
authors are not yet finished. They add: 'This confusion is continually present in 
language as we use it. We appear to be saying something very important about 
something: and actually we are only saying something about our own feelings.'' 
Before considering the issues really raised by this momentous little paragraph 
(designed, you will remember, for 'the upper forms of schools') we must eliminate 
one mere confusion into which Gains and Titius have fallen. Even on their own 
view — on any conceivable view — the man who says This is sublime cannot mean / 
have sublime feelings. Even if it were granted that such qualities as sublimity were 
simply and solely projected into things from our own emotions, yet the emotions 
which prompt the projection are the correlatives, and therefore almost the 
opposites, of the qualities projected. The feelings which make a man call an object 
subUme are not sublime feelings but feelings of veneration. If This is sublime is to 
be reduced at all to a statement about the speaker's feeUngs, the proper translation 
would be / have humble feelings. If the view held by Gaius and Titius were 
consistently applied it would lead to obvious absurdities. It would force them to 
maintain that You are contemptible means / have contemptible feelings ', in fact that 
Your feelings are contemptible means My feelings are contemptible. But we need not 
delay over this which is the very pons asinorum of our subject. It would be unjust to 
Gaius and Titius themselves to emphasize what was doubtless a mere 
inadvertence. 
The schoolboy who reads this passage in The Green Book will believe two 
propositions: firstly, that all sentences containing a predicate of value are 
statements about the emotional state of the speaker, and secondly, that all such 
statements are unimportant. It is true that Gaius and Titius have said neither of 
these things in so many words. They have treated only one particular predicate of 
value (sublime) as a word descriptive of the speaker's emotions. The pupils are left 
to do for themselves the work of extending the same treatment to all predicates of 
value: and no slightest obstacle to such extension is placed in their way. The 
authors may or may not desire the extension: they may never have given the 
question five minutes' serious thought in their lives. I am not concerned with what 
they desired but with the effect their book will certainly have on the schoolboy's 
mind. In the same way, they have not said that judgements of value are 
unimportant. Their words are that we 'appear to be saying something very 
important' when in reality we are 'only saying something about our own feeUngs'. 
No schoolboy will be able to resist the suggestion brought to bear upon him by 
that word only. I do not mean, of course, that he will make any conscious 
inference from what he reads to a general philosophical theory that all values are 
subjective and trivial. The very power of Gaius and Titius depends on the fact that 
they are dealing with a boy: a boy who thinks he is 'doing' his 'English prep' and 
has no notion that ethics, theology, and politics are all at stake. It is not a theory 
they put into his mind, but an assumption, which ten years hence, its origin 
forgotten and its presence unconscious, will condition him to take one side in a 
controversy which he has never recognized as a controversy at all. The authors 
themselves, I suspect, hardly know what they are doing to the boy, and he cannot 
know what is being done to him. 
Before considering the philosophical credentials of the position which Gaius and 
Titius have adopted about value, I should like to show its practical results on the 
educational procedure. In their fourth chapter they quote a silly advertisement of a 
pleasure cruise and proceed to inoculate their pupils against the sort of writing it 
exhibits. 2 The advertisement tells us that those who buy tickets for this cruise will 
go 'across the Western Ocean where Drake of Devon sailed', 'adventuring after the 
treasures of the Indies', and bringing home themselves also a 'treasure' of 'golden 
hours' and 'glowing colours'. It is a bad bit of writing, of course: a venal and 
bathetic exploitation of those emotions of awe and pleasure which men feel in 
visiting places that have striking associations with history or legend. If Gaius and 
Titius were to stick to their last and teach their readers (as they promised to do) 
the art of English composition, it was their business to put this advertisement side 
by side with passages from great writers in which the very emotion is well 
expressed, and then show where the difference lies. 
They might have used Johnson's famous passage from the Western Islands, which 
concludes: 'That man is little to be envied, whose patriotism would not gain force 
upon the plain of Marathon, or whose piety would not grow warmer among the 
ruins of lona.'^ They might have taken that place in The Prelude where Wordsworth 
describes how the antiquity of London first descended on his mind with 'Weight 
and power, Power growing under weight'.'' A lesson which had laid such literature 
beside the advertisement and really discriminated the good from the bad would 
have been a lesson worth teaching. There would have been some blood and sap in 
it — the trees of knowledge and of life growing together. It would also have had the 
merit of being a lesson in literature: a subject of which Gains and Titius, despite 
their professed purpose, are uncommonly shy. 
What they actually do is to point out that the luxurious motor-vessel won't really 
sail where Drake did, that the tourists will not have any adventures, that the 
treasures they bring home will be of a purely metaphorical nature, and that a trip 
to Margate might provide 'all the pleasure and rest' they required. ^ All this is very 
true: talents inferior to those of Gains and Titius would have sufficed to discover 
it. What they have not noticed, or not cared about, is that a very similar treatment 
could be apphed to much good literature which treats the same emotion. What, 
after all, can the history of early British Christianity, in pure reason, add to the 
motives for piety as they exist in the eighteenth century? Why should Mr 
Wordsworth's inn be more comfortable or the air of London more healthy because 
London has existed for a long time? Or, if there is indeed any obstacle which will 
prevent a critic from 'debunking' Johnson and Wordsworth (and Lamb, and Virgil, 
and Thomas Browne, and Mr de la Mare) as The Green Book debunks the 
advertisement, Gaius and Titius have given their schoolboy readers no faintest 
help to its discovery. 
From this passage the schoolboy will learn about Uterature precisely nothing. What 
he will learn quickly enough, and perhaps indelibly, is the belief that all emotions 
aroused by local association are in themselves contrary to reason and 
contemptible. He will have no notion that there are two ways of being immune to 
such an advertisement — that it falls equally flat on those who are above it and 
those who are below it, on the man of real sensibility and on the mere trousered 
ape who has never been able to conceive the Atlantic as anything more than so 
many million tons of cold salt water. There are two men to whom we offer in vain 
a false leading article on patriotism and honour: one is the coward, the other is the 
honourable and patriotic man. None of this is brought before the schoolboy's 
mind. On the contrary, he is encouraged to reject the lure of the 'Western Ocean' 
on the very dangerous ground that in so doing he will prove himself a knowing 
fellow who can't be bubbled out of his cash. Gaius and Titius, while teaching him 
nothing about letters, have cut out of his soul, long before he is old enough to 
choose, the possibility of having certain experiences which thinkers of more 
authority than they have held to be generous, fruitful, and humane. But it is not 
only Gaius and Titius. In another little book, whose author I will call OrbiUus, I 
find that the same operation, under the same general anaesthetic, is being carried 
out. Orbilius chooses for 'debunking' a silly bit of writing on horses, where these 
animals are praised as the 'willing servants' of the early colonists in Austraha.'^ And 
he falls into the same trap as Gaius and Titius. Of Ruksh and Sleipnir and the 
weeping horses of Achilles and the war-horse in the Book of Job — nay even of Brer 
Rabbit and of Peter Rabbit — of man's prehistoric piety to 'our brother the ox' — of 
all that this semi-anthropomorphic treatment of beasts has meant in human 
history and of the Uterature where it finds noble or piquant expression — he has not 
a word to say.^ Even of the problems of animal psychology as they exist for science 
he says nothing. He contents himself with explaining that horses are not, secundum 
litteram, interested in colonial expansion.*^ This piece of information is really all 
that his pupils get from him. Why the composition before them is bad, when 
others that lie open to the same charge are good, they do not hear. Much less do 
they learn of the two classes of men who are, respectively, above and below the 
danger of such writing — the man who really knows horses and really loves them, 
not with anthropomorphic illusions, but with ordinate love, and the irredeemable 
urban blockhead to whom a horse is merely an old-fashioned means of transport. 
Some pleasure in their own ponies and dogs they will have lost; some incentive to 
cruelty or neglect they will have received; some pleasure in their own knowingness 
will have entered their minds. That is their day's lesson in English, though of 
English they have learned nothing. Another Uttle portion of the human heritage 
has been quietly taken from them before they were old enough to understand. 
I have hitherto been assuming that such teachers as Gaius and Titius do not fully 
realize what they are doing and do not intend the far-reaching consequences it will 
actually have. There is, of course, another possibility. What I have called 
(presuming on their concurrence in a certain traditional system of values) the 
'trousered ape' and the 'urban blockhead' may be precisely the kind of man they 
really wish to produce. The differences between us may go all the way down. They 
may really hold that the ordinary human feeUngs about the past or animals or large 
waterfalls are contrary to reason and contemptible and ought to be eradicated. 
They may be intending to make a clean sweep of traditional values and start with a 
new set. That position will be discussed later. If it is the position which Gaius and 
Titius are holding, I must, for the moment, content myself with pointing out that 
it is a philosophical and not a literary position. In filling their book with it they 
have been unjust to the parent or headmaster who buys it and who has got the 
work of amateur philosophers where he expected the work of professional 
grammarians. A man would be annoyed if his son returned from the dentist with 
his teeth untouched and his head crammed with the dentist's obiter dicta on 
bimetallism or the Baconian theory. 
But I doubt whether Gaius and Titius have really planned, under cover of teaching 
English, to propagate their philosophy. I think they have slipped into it for the 
following reasons. In the first place, literary criticism is difficult, and what they 
actually do is very much easier. To explain why a bad treatment of some basic 
human emotion is bad Uterature is, if we exclude all question-begging attacks on 
the emotion itself, a very hard thing to do. Even Dr Richards, who first seriously 
tackled the problem of badness in literature, failed, I think, to do it. To 'debunk' 
the emotion, on the basis of a commonplace rationalism, is within almost anyone's 
capacity. In the second place, I think Gaius and Titius may have honestly 
misunderstood the pressing educational need of the moment. They see the world 
around them swayed by emotional propaganda — they have learned from tradition 
that youth is sentimental — and they conclude that the best thing they can do is to 
fortify the minds of young people against emotion. My own experience as a 
teacher tells an opposite tale. For every one pupil who needs to be guarded from a 
weak excess of sensibility there are three who need to be awakened from the 
slumber of cold vulgarity. The task of the modern educator is not to cut down 
jungles but to irrigate deserts. The right defence against false sentiments is to 
inculcate just sentiments. By starving the sensibility of our pupils we only make 
them easier prey to the propagandist when he comes. For famished nature will be 
avenged and a hard heart is no infallible protection against a soft head. 
But there is a third, and a profounder, reason for the procedure which Gaius and 
Titius adopt. They may be perfectly ready to admit that a good education should 
build some sentiments while destroying others. They may endeavour to do so. But 
it is impossible that they should succeed. Do what they will, it is the 'debunking' 
side of their work, and this side alone, which will really tell. In order to grasp this 
necessity clearly I must digress for a moment to show that what may be called the 
educational predicament of Gaius and Titius is different from that of all their 
predecessors. 
Until quite modern times all teachers and even all men believed the universe to be 
such that certain emotional reactions on our part could be either congruous or 
incongruous to it — believed, in fact, that objects did not merely receive, but could 
merit., our approval or disapproval, our reverence or our contempt. The reason why 
Coleridge agreed with the tourist who called the cataract sublime and disagreed 
with the one who called it pretty was of course that he believed inanimate nature 
to be such that certain responses could be more 'just' or 'ordinate' or 'appropriate' 
to it than others. And he beheved (correctly) that the tourists thought the same. 
The man who called the cataract sublime was not intending simply to describe his 
own emotions about it: he was also claiming that the object was one which merited 
those emotions. But for this claim there would be nothing to agree or disagree 
about. To disagree with This is pretty if those words simply described the lady's 
feelings, would be absurd: if she had said I feel sick Coleridge would hardly have 
replied No; I feel quite well. When Shelley, having compared the human sensibiUty 
to an Aeolian lyre, goes on to add that it differs from a lyre in having a power of 
'internal adjustment' whereby it can 'accommodate its chords to the motions of 
that which strikes them',^ he is assuming the same behef. 'Can you be righteous', 
asks Traherne, 'unless you be just in rendering to things their due esteem? All 
things were made to be yours and you were made to prize them according to their 
value. 
St Augustine defines virtue as ordo amoris, the ordinate condition of the affections 
in which every object is accorded that kind of degree of love which is appropriate 
to it." Aristotle says that the aim of education is to make the pupil like and dislike 
what he ought. '^ When the age for reflective thought comes, the pupil who has 
been thus trained in 'ordinate affections' or 'just sentiments' will easily find the first 
principles in Ethics; but to the corrupt man they will never be visible at all and he 
can make no progress in that science.'^ Plato before him had said the same. The 
little human animal will not at first have the right responses. It must be trained to 
feel pleasure, liking, disgust, and hatred at those things which really are pleasant, 
likeable, disgusting and hateful.'^ In the Republic, the well-nurtured youth is one 
'who would see most clearly whatever was amiss in ill-made works of man or ill- 
grown works of nature, and with a just distaste would blame and hate the ugly 
even from his earhest years and would give delighted praise to beauty, receiving it 
into his soul and being nourished by it, so that he becomes a man of gentle heart. 
All this before he is of an age to reason; so that when Reason at length comes to 
him, then, bred as he has been, he will hold out his hands in welcome and 
recognize her because of the affinity he bears to her.''^ in early Hinduism that 
conduct in men which can be called good consists in conformity to, or almost 
participation in, the Rta — that great ritual or pattern of nature and supernature 
which is revealed alike in the cosmic order, the moral virtues, and the ceremonial 
of the temple. Righteousness, correctness, order, the Rta, is constantly identified 
with satya or truth, correspondence to reality. As Plato said that the Good was 
'beyond existence' and Wordsworth that through virtue the stars were strong, so 
the Indian masters say that the gods themselves are born of the Rta and obey it.'* 
The Chinese also speak of a great thing (the greatest thing) called the Tao. It is the 
reality beyond all predicates, the abyss that was before the Creator Himself. It is 
Nature, it is the Way, the Road. It is the Way in which the universe goes on, the 
Way in which things everlastingly emerge, stilly and tranquilly, into space and 
time. It is also the Way which every man should tread in imitation of that cosmic 
and supercosmic progression, conforming all activities to that great exemplar.'^ 'In 
ritual', say the Analects, 'it is harmony with Nature that is prized.'"^ The ancient 
Jews likewise praise the Law as being 'true'.'' 
This conception in all its forms, Platonic, AristoteUan, Stoic, Christian, and 
Oriental alike, I shall henceforth refer to for brevity simply as 'the Tao'. Some of 
the accounts of it which I have quoted will seem, perhaps, to many of you merely 
quaint or even magical. But what is common to them all is something we cannot 
neglect. It is the doctrine of objective value, the behef that certain attitudes are 
really true, and others really false, to the kind of thing the universe is and the kind 
of things we are. Those who know the Tao can hold that to call children delightful 
or old men venerable is not simply to record a psychological fact about our own 
parental or fihal emotions at the moment, but to recognize a quality which 
demands a certain response from us whether we make it or not. I myself do not 
enjoy the society of small children: because I speak from within the Tao I 
recognize this as a defect in myself — just as a man may have to recognize that he is 
tone deaf or colour bUnd. And because our approvals and disapprovals are thus 
recognitions of objective value or responses to an objective order, therefore 
emotional states can be in harmony with reason (when we feel liking for what 
ought to be approved) or out of harmony with reason (when we perceive that 
liking is due but cannot feel it). No emotion is, in itself, a judgement; in that sense 
all emotions and sentiments are alogical. But they can be reasonable or 
unreasonable as they conform to Reason or fail to conform. The heart never takes 
the place of the head: but it can, and should, obey it. 
Over against this stands the world of The Green Book. In it the very possibility of a 
sentiment being reasonable — or even unreasonable — has been excluded from the 
outset. It can be reasonable or unreasonable only if it conforms or fails to conform 
to something else. To say that the cataract is sublime means saying that our 
emotion of humility is appropriate or ordinate to the reality, and thus to speak of 
something else besides the emotion; just as to say that a shoe fits is to speak not 
only of shoes but of feet. But this reference to something beyond the emotion is 
what Gaius and Titius exclude from every sentence containing a predicate of 
value. Such statements, for them, refer solely to the emotion. Now the emotion, 
thus considered by itself, cannot be either in agreement or disagreement with 
Reason. It is irrational not as a paralogism is irrational, but as a physical event is 
irrational: it does not rise even to the dignity of error. On this view, the world of 
facts, without one trace of value, and the world of feeUngs, without one trace of 
truth or falsehood, justice or injustice, confront one another, and no rapprochement 
is possible. 
Hence the educational problem is wholly different according as you stand within 
or without the Tao. For those within, the task is to train in the pupil those 
responses which are in themselves appropriate, whether anyone is making them or 
not, and in making which the very nature of man consists. Those without, if they 
are logical, must regard all sentiments as equally non-rational, as mere mists 
between us and the real objects. As a result, they must either decide to remove all 
sentiments, as far as possible, from the pupil's mind; or else to encourage some 
sentiments for reasons that have nothing to do with their intrinsic 'justness' or 
'ordinacy'. The latter course involves them in the questionable process of creating 
in others by 'suggestion' or incantation a mirage which their own reason has 
successfully dissipated. 
Perhaps this will become clearer if we take a concrete instance. When a Roman 
father told his son that it was a sweet and seemly thing to die for his country, he 
believed what he said. He was communicating to the son an emotion which he 
himself shared and which he beUeved to be in accord with the value which his 
judgement discerned in noble death. He was giving the boy the best he had, giving 
of his spirit to humanize him as he had given of his body to beget him. But Gaius 
and Titius cannot believe that in calling such a death sweet and seemly they would 
be saying 'something important about something'. Their own method of 
debunking would cry out against them if they attempted to do so. For death is not 
something to eat and therefore cannot be duke in the literal sense, and it is unlikely 
that the real sensations preceding it will be dulce even by analogy. And as for 
decorum — that is only a word describing how some other people will feel about 
your death when they happen to think of it, which won't be often, and will 
certainly do you no good. There are only two courses open to Gaius and Titius. 
Either they must go the whole way and debunk this sentiment like any other, or 
must set themselves to work to produce, from outside, a sentiment which they 
believe to be of no value to the pupil and which may cost him his life, because it is 
useful to us (the survivors) that our young men should feel it. If they embark on 
this course the difference between the old and the new education will be an 
important one. Where the old initiated, the new merely 'conditions'. The old dealt 
with its pupils as grown birds deal with young birds when they teach them to fly; 
the new deals with them more as the poultry-keeper deals with young birds — 
making them thus or thus for purposes of which the birds know nothing. In a 
word, the old was a kind of propagation — men transmitting manhood to men; the 
new is merely propaganda. 
It is to their credit that Gaius and Titius embrace the first alternative. Propaganda 
is their abomination: not because their own philosophy gives a ground for 
condemning it (or anything else) but because they are better than their principles. 
They probably have some vague notion (I will examine it in my next lecture) that 
valour and good faith and justice could be sufficiently commended to the pupil on 
what they would call 'rational' or 'biological' or 'modern' grounds, if it should ever 
become necessary. In the meantime, they leave the matter alone and get on with 
the business of debunking. But this course, though less inhuman, is not less 
disastrous than the opposite alternative of cynical propaganda. Let us suppose for 
a moment that the harder virtues could really be theoretically justified with no 
appeal to objective value. It still remains true that no justification of virtue will 
enable a man to be virtuous. Without the aid of trained emotions the intellect is 
powerless against the animal organism. I had sooner play cards against a man who 
was quite sceptical about ethics, but bred to believe that 'a gentleman does not 
cheat', than against an irreproachable moral philosopher who had been brought up 
among sharpers. In battle it is not syllogisms that will keep the reluctant nerves 
and muscles to their post in the third hour of the bombardment. The crudest 
sentimentalism (such as Gaius and Titius would wince at) about a flag or a 
country or a regiment will be of more use. We were told it all long ago by Plato. As 
the king governs by his executive, so Reason in man must rule the mere appetites 
by means of the 'spirited element'. ^o The head rules the belly through the chest — 
the seat, as Alanus tells us, of Magnanimity,^! of emotions organized by trained 
habit into stable sentiments. The Chest-Magnanimity-Sentiment — these are the 
indispensable liaison officers between cerebral man and visceral man. It may even 
be said that it is by this middle element that man is man: for by his intellect he is 
mere spirit and by his appetite mere animal. 
The operation of The Green Book and its kind is to produce what may be called 
Men without Chests. It is an outrage that they should be commonly spoken of as 
Intellectuals. This gives them the chance to say that he who attacks them attacks 
Intelligence. It is not so. They are not distinguished from other men by any 
unusual skill in finding truth nor any virginal ardour to pursue her. Indeed it 
would be strange if they were: a persevering devotion to truth, a nice sense of 
intellectual honour, cannot be long maintained without the aid of a sentiment 
which Gaius and Titius could debunk as easily as any other. It is not excess of 
thought but defect of fertile and generous emotion that marks them out. Their 
heads are no bigger than the ordinary: it is the atrophy of the chest beneath that 
makes them seem so. 
And all the time — such is the tragi-comedy of our situation — we continue to 
clamour for those very qualities we are rendering impossible. You can hardly open 
a periodical without coming across the statement that what our civilization needs 
is more 'drive', or dynamism, or self-sacrifice, or 'creativity'. In a sort of ghastly 
simpUcity we remove the organ and demand the function. We make men without 
chests and expect of them virtue and enterprise. We laugh at honour and are 
shocked to find traitors in our midst. We castrate and bid the geldings be fruitful. 
The practical result of education in the spirit of The Green Book must be the 
destruction of the society which accepts it. But this is not necessarily a refutation 
of subjectivism about values as a theory. The true doctrine might be a doctrine 
which if we accept we die. No one who speaks from within the Tao could reject it 
on that account: '£v 5s cpasi kqi '5A£aaou. But it has not yet come to that. There 
are theoretical difficulties in the philosophy of Gains and Titius. 
However subjective they may be about some traditional values, Gains and Titius 
have shown by the very act of writing The Green Book that there must be some 
other values about which they are not subjective at all. They write in order to 
produce certain states of mind in the rising generation, if not because they think 
those states of mind intrinsically just or good, yet certainly because they think 
them to be the means to some state of society which they regard as desirable. It 
would not be difficult to collect from various passages in The Green Book what 
their ideal is. But we need not. The important point is not the precise nature of 
their end, but the fact that they have an end at all. They must have, or their book 
(being purely practical in intention) is written to no purpose. And this end must 
have real value in their eyes. To abstain from caUing it good and to use, instead, 
such predicates as 'necessary' or 'progressive' or 'efficient' would be a subterfuge. 
They could be forced by argument to answer the questions 'necessary for what?', 
'progressing towards what?', 'effecting what?'; in the last resort they would have to 
admit that some state of affairs was in their opinion good for its own sake. And this 
time they could not maintain that 'good' simply described their own emotion about 
it. For the whole purpose of their book is so to condition theyoung reader that he 
will share their approval, and this would be either a fool's or a villain's undertaking 
unless they held that their approval was in some way vahd or correct. 
In actual fact Gains and Titius will be found to hold, with complete uncritical 
dogmatism, the whole system of values which happened to be in vogue among 
moderately educated young men of the professional classes during the period 
between the two wars.' Their scepticism about values is on the surface: it is for use 
on other people's values; about the values current in their own set they are not 
nearly sceptical enough. And this phenomenon is very usual. A great many of 
those who 'debunk' traditional or (as they would say) 'sentimental' values have in 
the background values of their own which they beUeve to be immune from the 
debunking process. They claim to be cutting away the parasitic growth of emotion, 
religious sanction, and inherited taboos, in order that 'real' or 'basic' values may 
emerge. I will now try to find out what happens if this is seriously attempted. 
Let us continue to use the previous example — that of death for a good cause — not, 
of course, because virtue is the only value or martyrdom the only virtue, but 
because this is the experimentum crucis which shows different systems of thought in 
the clearest light. Let us suppose that an Innovator in values regards duke et 
decorum and greater love hath no man as mere irrational sentiments which are to be 
stripped off in order that we may get down to the 'reaUstic' or 'basic' ground of this 
value. Where will he find such a ground? 
First of all, he might say that the real value lay in the utiUty of such sacrifice to the 
community. 'Good', he might say, 'means what is useful to the community.' But of 
course the death of the community is not useful to the community — only the death 
of some of its members. What is really meant is that the death of some men is 
useful to other men. That is very true. But on what ground are some men being 
asked to die for the benefit of others? Every appeal to pride, honour, shame, or 
love is excluded by hypothesis. To use these would be to return to sentiment and 
the Innovator's task is, having cut all that away, to explain to men, in terms of pure 
reasoning, why they will be well advised to die that others may live. He may say 
'Unless some of us risk death all of us are certain to die.' But that will be true only 
in a Umited number of cases; and even when it is true it provokes the very 
reasonable counter question 'Why should I be one of those who take the risk?' 
At this point the Innovator may ask why, after all, selfishness should be more 
'rational' or 'intelligent' than altruism. The question is welcome. If by Reason we 
mean the process actually employed by Gaius and Titius when engaged in 
debunking (that is, the connecting by inference of propositions, ultimately derived 
from sense data, with further propositions), then the answer must be that a refusal 
to sacrifice oneself is no more rational than a consent to do so. And no less 
rational. Neither choice is rational — or irrational — at all. From propositions about 
fact alone no practical conclusion can ever be drawn. This will preserve society 
cannot lead to do this except by the mediation of society ought to be preserved. This 
will cost you your life cannot lead directly to do not do this: it can lead to it only 
through a felt desire or an acknowledged duty of self-preservation. The Innovator 
is trying to get a conclusion in the imperative mood out of premisses in the 
indicative mood: and though he continues trying to all eternity he cannot succeed, 
for the thing is impossible. We must therefore either extend the word Reason to 
include what our ancestors called Practical Reason and confess that judgements 
such as society ought to be preserved (though they can support themselves by no 
reason of the sort that Gaius and Titius demand) are not mere sentiments but are 
rationality itself; or else we must give up at once, and for ever, the attempt to find 
a core of 'rational' value behind all the sentiments we have debunked. The 
Innovator will not take the first alternative, for practical principles known to all 
men by Reason are simply the Tao which he has set out to supersede. He is more 
likely to give up the quest for a 'rational' core and to hunt for some other ground 
even more 'basic' and 'realistic'. 
This he will probably feel that he has found in Instinct. The preservation of 
society, and of the species itself, are ends that do not hang on the precarious 
thread of Reason: they are given by Instinct. That is why there is no need to argue 
against the man who does not acknowledge them. We have an instinctive urge to 
preserve our own species. That is why men ought to work for posterity. We have 
no instinctive urge to keep promises or to respect individual life: that is why 
scruples of justice and humanity — in fact the Tao — can be properly swept away 
when they conflict with our real end, the preservation of the species. That, again, 
is why the modern situation permits and demands a new sexual morahty: the old 
taboos served some real purpose in helping to preserve the species, but 
contraceptives have modified this and we can now abandon many of the taboos. 
For of course sexual desire, being instinctive, is to be gratified whenever it does 
not conflict with the preservation of the species. It looks, in fact, as if an ethics 
based on instinct will give the Innovator all he wants and nothing that he does not 
want. 
In reality we have not advanced one step. I will not insist on the point that Instinct 
is a name for we know not what (to say that migratory birds find their way by 
instinct is only to say that we do not know how migratory birds find their way), for 
I think it is here being used in a fairly definite sense, to mean an unreflective or 
spontaneous impulse widely felt by the members of a given species. In what way 
does Instinct, thus conceived, help us to find 'real' values? Is it maintained that we 
must obey Instinct, that we cannot do otherwise? But if so, why are Green Books 
and the like written? Why this stream of exhortation to drive us where we cannot 
help going? Why such praise for those who have submitted to the inevitable? Or is 
it maintained that if we do obey Instinct we shall be happy and satisfied? But the 
very question we are considering was that of facing death which (so far as the 
Innovator knows) cuts off every possible satisfaction: and if we have an instinctive 
desire for the good of posterity then this desire, by the very nature of the case, can 
never be satisfied, since its aim is achieved, if at all, when we are dead. It looks 
very much as if the Innovator would have to say not that we must obey Instinct, 
nor that it will satisfy us to do so, but that we ought to obey it.^ 
But why ought we to obey Instinct? Is there another instinct of a higher order 
directing us to do so, and a third of a still higher order directing us to obey it} — an 
infinite regress of instincts? This is presumably impossible, but nothing else will 
serve. From the statement about psychological fact 'I have an impulse to do so and 
so' we cannot by any ingenuity derive the practical principle 'I ought to obey this 
impulse'. Even if it were true that men had a spontaneous, unreflective impulse to 
sacrifice their own lives for the preservation of their fellows, it remains a quite 
separate question whether this is an impulse they should control or one they 
should indulge. For even the Innovator admits that many impulses (those which 
conflict with the preservation of the species) have to be controlled. And this 
admission surely introduces us to a yet more fundamental difficulty. 
Telling us to obey Instinct is like telling us to obey 'people'. People say different 
things: so do instincts. Our instincts are at war. If it is held that the instinct for 
preserving the species should always be obeyed at the expense of other instincts, 
whence do we derive this rule of precedence? To listen to that instinct speaking in 
its own cause and deciding it in its own favour would be rather simple-minded. 
Each instinct, if you listen to it, will claim to be gratified at the expense of all the 
rest. By the very act of listening to one rather than to others we have already 
prejudged the case. If we did not bring to the examination of our instincts a 
knowledge of their comparative dignity we could never learn it from them. And 
that knowledge cannot itself be instinctive: the judge cannot be one of the parties 
judged; or, if he is, the decision is worthless and there is no ground for placing the 
preservation of the species above self-preservation or sexual appetite. 
The idea that, without appealing to any court higher than the instincts themselves, 
we can yet find grounds for preferring one instinct above its fellows dies very hard. 
We grasp at useless words: we call it the 'basic', or 'fundamental', or 'primal', or 
'deepest' instinct. It is of no avail. Either these words conceal a value judgement 
passed upon the instinct and therefore not derivable from it, or else they merely 
record its felt intensity, the frequency of its operation and its wide distribution. If 
the former, the whole attempt to base value upon instinct has been abandoned: if 
the latter, these observations about the quantitative aspects of a psychological 
event lead to no practical conclusion. It is the old dilemma. Either the premisses 
already concealed an imperative or the conclusion remains merely in the 
indicative. 
Finally, it is worth inquiry whether there is any instinct to care for posterity or 
preserve the species. I do not discover it in myself: and yet I am a man rather 
prone to think of remote futurity — a man who can read Mr Olaf Stapledon with 
delight. Much less do I find it easy to beheve that the majority of people who have 
sat opposite me in buses or stood with me in queues feel an unreflective impulse to 
do anything at all about the species, or posterity. Only people educated in a 
particular way have ever had the idea 'posterity' before their minds at all. It is 
difficult to assign to instinct our attitude towards an object which exists only for 
reflective men. What we have by nature is an impulse to preserve our own children 
and grandchildren; an impulse which grows progressively feebler as the 
imagination looks forward and finally dies out in the 'deserts of vast futurity'. No 
parents who were guided by this instinct would dream for a moment of setting up 
the claims of their hypothetical descendants against those of the baby actually 
crowing and kicking in the room. Those of us who accept the Tao may, perhaps, 
say that they ought to do so: but that is not open to those who treat instinct as the 
source of value. As we pass from mother love to rational planning for the future we 
are passing away from the realm of instinct into that of choice and reflection: and 
if instinct is the source of value, planning for the future ought to be less 
respectable and less obligatory than the baby language and cuddling of the fondest 
mother or the most fatuous nursery anecdotes of a doting father. If we are to base 
ourselves upon instinct, these things are the substance, and care for posterity the 
shadow — the huge, flickering shadow of the nursery happiness cast upon the 
screen of the unknown future. I do not say this projection is a bad thing: but then I 
do not believe that instinct is the ground of value judgements. What is absurd is to 
claim that your care for posterity finds its justification in instinct and then flout at 
every turn the only instinct on which it could be supposed to rest, tearing the child 
almost from the breast to creche and kindergarten in the interests of progress and 
the coming race. 
The truth finally becomes apparent that neither in any operation with factual 
propositions nor in any appeal to instinct can the Innovator find the basis for a 
system of values. None of the principles he requires are to be found there: but they 
are all to be found somewhere else. 'AH within the four seas are his brothers'  
says Confucius of the Chiin-tzu, the cuor gentil or gentleman. Humani nihil a me 
alienum puto says the Stoic. 'Do as you would be done by,' says Jesus. 'Humanity is 
to be preserved,' says Locke." All the practical principles behind the Innovator's 
case for posterity, or society, or the species, are there from time immemorial in the 
Tao. But they are nowhere else. Unless you accept these without question as being 
to the world of action what axioms are to the world of theory, you can have no 
practical principles whatever. You cannot reach them as conclusions: they are 
premisses. You may, since they can give no 'reason' for themselves of a kind to 
silence Gaius and Titius, regard them as sentiments: but then you must give up 
contrasting 'real' or 'rational' value with sentimental value. All value will be 
sentimental^ and you must confess (on pain of abandoning every value) that all 
sentiment is not 'merely' subjective. You may, on the other hand, regard them as 
rational — nay as rationality itself — as things so obviously reasonable that they 
neither demand nor admit proof. But then you must allow that Reason can be 
practical, that an ought must not be dismissed because it cannot produce some is 
as its credential. If nothing is self-evident, nothing can be proved. Similarly if 
nothing is obligatory for its own sake, nothing is obligatory at all. 
To some it will appear that I have merely restored under another name what they 
always meant by basic or fundamental instinct. But much more than a choice of 
words is involved. The Innovator attacks traditional values (the Tao) in defence of 
what he at first supposes to be (in some special sense) 'rational' or 'biological' 
values. But as we have seen, all the values which he uses in attacking the Tao, and 
even claims to be substituting for it, are themselves derived from the Tao. If he 
had really started from scratch, from right outside the human tradition of value, no 
jugglery could have advanced him an inch towards the conception that a man 
should die for the community or work for posterity. If the Tao falls, all his own 
conceptions of value fall with it. Not one of them can claim any authority other 
than that of the Tao. Only by such shreds of the Tao as he has inherited is he 
enabled even to attack it. The question therefore arises what title he has to select 
bits of it for acceptance and to reject others. For if the bits he rejects have no 
authority, neither have those he retains: if what he retains is vahd, what he rejects 
is equally valid too. 
The Innovator, for example, rates high the claims of posterity. He cannot get any 
vaUd claim for posterity out of instinct or (in the modern sense) reason. He is 
really deriving our duty to posterity from the Tao; our duty to do good to all men 
is an axiom of Practical Reason, and our duty to do good to our descendants is a 
clear deduction from it. But then, in every form of the Tao which has come down 
to us, side by side with the duty to children and descendants lies the duty to 
parents and ancestors. By what right do we reject one and accept the other? Again, 
the Innovator may place economic value first. To get people fed and clothed is the 
great end, and in pursuit of its scruples about justice and good faith may be set 
aside. The Tao of course agrees with him about the importance of getting the 
people fed and clothed. Unless the Innovator were himself using the Tao he could 
never have learned of such a duty. But side by side with it in the Tao lie those 
duties of justice and good faith which he is ready to debunk. What is his warrant? 
He may be a Jingoist, a RaciaUst, an extreme nationalist, who maintains that the 
advancement of his own people is the object to which all else ought to yield. But 
no kind of factual observation and no appeal to instinct will give him a ground for 
this option. Once more, he is in fact deriving it from the Tao: a duty to our own 
kin, because they are our own kin, is a part of traditional morality. But side by side 
with it in the Tao, and limiting it, lie the inflexible demands of justice, and the rule 
that, in the long run, all men are our brothers. Whence comes the Innovator's 
authority to pick and choose? 
Since I can see no answer to these questions, I draw the following conclusions. 
This thing which I have called for convenience the Tao, and which others may call 
Natural Law or Traditional Morality or the First Principles of Practical Reason or 
the First Platitudes, is not one among a series of possible systems of value. It is the 
sole source of all value judgements. If it is rejected, all value is rejected. If any 
value is retained, it is retained. The effort to refute it and raise a new system of 
value in its place is self-contradictory. There has never been, and never will be, a 
radically new judgement of value in the history of the world. What purport to be 
new systems or (as they now call them) 'ideologies', all consist of fragments from 
the Tao itself, arbitrarily wrenched from their context in the whole and then 
swollen to madness in their isolation, yet still owing to the Tao and to it alone such 
vaUdity as they possess. If my duty to my parents is a superstition, then so is my 
duty to posterity. If justice is a superstition, then so is my duty to my country or 
my race. If the pursuit of scientific knowledge is a real value, then so is conjugal 
fidelity. The rebellion of new ideologies against the Tao is a rebellion of the 
branches against the tree: if the rebels could succeed they would find that they had 
destroyed themselves. The human mind has no more power of inventing a new 
value than of imagining a new primary colour, or, indeed, of creating a new sun 
and a new sky for it to move in. 
Does this mean, then, that no progress in our perceptions of value can ever take 
place? That we are bound down for ever to an unchanging code given once for all? 
And is it, in any event, possible to talk of obeying what I call the Tao? If we lump 
together, as I have done, the traditional moralities of East and West, the Christian, 
the Pagan, and the Jew, shall we not find many contradictions and some 
absurdities? I admit all this. Some criticism, some removal of contradictions, even 
some real development, is required. But there are two very different kinds of 
criticism. 
A theorist about language may approach his native tongue, as it were from outside, 
regarding its genius as a thing that has no claim on him and advocating wholesale 
alterations of its idiom and spelling in the interests of commercial convenience or 
scientific accuracy. That is one thing. A great poet, who has 'loved, and been well 
nurtured in, his mother tongue', may also make great alterations in it, but his 
changes of the language are made in the spirit of the language itself: he works from 
within. The language which suffers, has also inspired the changes. That is a 
different thing — as different as the works of Shakespeare are from Basic English. It 
is the difference between alteration from within and alteration from without: 
between the organic and the surgical. In the same way, the Tao admits 
development from within. There is a difference between a real moral advance and 
a mere innovation. From the Confucian 'Do not do to others what you would not 
like them to do to you' to the Christian 'Do as you would be done by' is a real 
advance. The morality of Nietzsche is a mere innovation. The first is an advance 
because no one who did not admit the vaUdity of the old maxim could see reason 
for accepting the new one, and anyone who accepted the old would at once 
recognize the new as an extension of the same principle. If he rejected it, he would 
have to reject it as a superfluity, something that went too far, not as something 
simply heterogeneous from his own ideas of value. But the Nietzschean ethic can 
be accepted only if we are ready to scrap traditional morals as a mere error and 
then to put ourselves in a position where we can find no ground for any value 
judgements at all. It is the difference between a man who says to us: 'You like your 
vegetables moderately fresh; why not grow your own and have them perfectly 
fresh?' and a man who says. Throw away that loaf and try eating bricks and 
centipedes instead.' 
Those who understand the spirit of the Tao and who have been led by that spirit 
can modify it in directions which that spirit itself demands. Only they can know 
what those directions are. The outsider knows nothing about the matter. His 
attempts at alteration, as we have seen, contradict themselves. So far from being 
able to harmonize discrepancies in its letter by penetration to its spirit, he merely 
snatches at some one precept, on which the accidents of time and place happen to 
have riveted his attention, and then rides it to death — for no reason that he can 
give. From within the Tao itself comes the only authority to modify the Tao. This 
is what Confucius meant when he said 'With those who follow a different Way it is 
useless to take counsel'. ^ This is why Aristotle said that only those who have been 
well brought up can usefully study ethics: to the corrupted man, the man who 
stands outside the Tao, the very starting point of this science is invisible.* He may 
be hostile, but he cannot be critical: he does not know what is being discussed. 
This is why it was also said 'This people that knoweth not the Law is accursed'^ 
and 'He that beheveth not shall be damned'.*^ An open mind, in questions that are 
not ultimate, is useful. But an open mind about the ultimate foundations either of 
Theoretical or of Practical Reason is idiocy. If a man's mind is open on these 
things, let his mouth at least be shut. He can say nothing to the purpose. Outside 
the Tao there is no ground for criticizing either the Tao or anything else. In 
particular instances it may, no doubt, be a matter of some delicacy to decide where 
the legitimate internal criticism ends and the fatal external kind begins. But 
wherever any precept of traditional morality is simply challenged to produce its 
credentials, as though the burden of proof lay on it, we have taken the wrong 
position. The legitimate reformer endeavours to show that the precept in question 
conflicts with some precept which its defenders allow to be more fundamental, or 
that it does not really embody the judgement of value it professes to embody. The 
direct frontal attack 'Why?' — 'What good does it do?' — 'Who said so?' is never 
permissible; not because it is harsh or offensive but because no values at all can 
justify themselves on that level. If you persist in that kind of trial you will destroy 
all values, and so destroy the bases of your own criticism as well as the thing 
criticized. You must not hold a pistol to the head of the Tao. Nor must we 
postpone obedience to a precept until its credentials have been examined. Only 
those who are practising the Tao will understand it. It is the well-nurtured man, 
the cuorgentil, and he alone, who can recognize Reason when it comes. ^ It is Paul, 
the Pharisee, the man 'perfect as touching the Law' who learns where and how that 
Law was deficient. '° In order to avoid misunderstanding, I may add that though I 
myself am a Theist, and indeed a Christian, I am not here attempting any indirect 
argument for Theism. I am simply arguing that if we are to have values at all we 
must accept the ultimate platitudes of Practical Reason as having absolute validity: 
that any attempt, having become sceptical about these, to reintroduce value lower 
down on some supposedly more 'realistic' basis, is doomed. Whether this position 
implies a supernatural origin for the Tao is a question I am not here concerned 
with. 
Yet how can the modern mind be expected to embrace the conclusion we have 
reached? This Tao which, it seems, we must treat as an absolute is simply a 
phenomenon like any other — the reflection upon the minds of our ancestors of the 
agricultural rhythm in which they lived or even of their physiology. We know 
already in principle how such things are produced: soon we shall know in detail: 
eventually we shall be able to produce them at will. Of course, while we did not 
know how minds were made, we accepted this mental furniture as a datum, even 
as a master. But many things in nature which were once our masters have become 
our servants. Why not this? Why must our conquest of nature stop short, in stupid 
reverence, before this final and toughest bit of 'nature' which has hitherto been 
called the conscience of man? You threaten us with some obscure disaster if we 
step outside it: but we have been threatened in that way by obscurantists at every 
step in our advance, and each time the threat has proved false. You say we shall 
have no values at all if we step outside the Tao. Very well: we shall probably find 
that we can get on quite comfortably without them. Let us regard all ideas of what 
we ought to do simply as an interesting psychological survival: let us step right out 
of all that and start doing what we like. Let us decide for ourselves what man is to 
be and make him into that: not on any ground of imagined value, but because we 
want him to be such. Having mastered our environment, let us now master 
ourselves and choose our own destiny. 
This is a very possible position: and those who hold it cannot be accused of self- 
contradiction like the half-hearted sceptics who still hope to find 'real' values when 
they have debunked the traditional ones. This is the rejection of the concept of 
value altogether. I shall need another lecture to consider it. 
ONCE there were four children whose names were Peter, Susan, Edmund and Lucy. This story is
about something that happened to them when they were sent away from London during the war
because of the air-raids. They were sent to the house of an old Professor who lived in the heart of the
country, ten miles from the nearest railway station and two miles from the nearest post office. He had
no wife and he lived in a very large house with a housekeeper called Mrs Macready and three
servants. (Their names were Ivy, Margaret and Betty, but they do not come into the story much.) He
himself was a very old man with shaggy white hair which grew over most of his face as well as on his
head, and they liked him almost at once; but on the first evening when he came out to meet them at
the front door he was so odd-looking that Lucy (who was the youngest) was a little afraid of him, and
Edmund (who was the next youngest) wanted to laugh and had to keep on pretending he was blowing
his nose to hide it.
As soon as they had said good night to the Professor and gone upstairs on the first night, the boys
came into the girls' room and they all talked it over.
"We've fallen on our feet and no mistake," said Peter. "This is going to be perfectly splendid. That
old chap will let us do anything we like."
 "I think he's an old dear," said Susan.
"Oh, come off it!" said Edmund, who was tired and pretending not to be tired, which always made
him bad-tempered. "Don't go on talking like that."
 "Like what?" said Susan; "and anyway, it's time you were in bed."
 "Trying to talk like Mother," said Edmund. "And who are you to say when I'm to go to bed? Go to
bed yourself."
 "Hadn't we all better go to bed?" said Lucy. "There's sure to be a row if we're heard talking here."
 "No there won't," said Peter. "I tell you this is the sort of house where no one's going to mind what
we do. Anyway, they won't hear us. It's about ten minutes' walk from here down to that dining-room,
and any amount of stairs and passages in between."
 "What's that noise?" said Lucy suddenly. It was a far larger house than she had ever been in before
and the thought of all those long passages and rows of doors leading into empty rooms was beginning
to make her feel a little creepy.
"It's only a bird, silly," said Edmund.
"It's an owl," said Peter. "This is going to be a wonderful place for birds. I shall go to bed now. I
say, let's go and explore tomorrow. You might find anything in a place like this. Did you see those
mountains as we came along? And the woods? There might be eagles. There might be stags. There'll
be hawks."
 "Badgers!" said Lucy.
 "Foxes!" said Edmund.
 "Rabbits!" said Susan.
 But when next morning came there was a steady rain falling, so thick that when you looked out of
the window you could see neither the mountains nor the woods nor even the stream in the garden.
"Of course it would be raining!" said Edmund. They had just finished their breakfast with the
Professor and were upstairs in the room he had set apart for them - a long, low room with two
windows looking out in one direction and two in another.
"Do stop grumbling, Ed," said Susan. "Ten to one it'll clear up in an hour or so. And in the
meantime we're pretty well off. There's a wireless and lots of books."
 "Not for me” said Peter; "I'm going to explore in the house."
 Everyone agreed to this and that was how the adventures began. It was the sort of house that you
never seem to come to the end of, and it was full of unexpected places. The first few doors they tried
led only into spare bedrooms, as everyone had expected that they would; but soon they came to a
very long room full of pictures and there they found a suit of armour; and after that was a room all
hung with green, with a harp in one corner; and then came three steps down and five steps up, and
then a kind of little upstairs hall and a door that led out on to a balcony, and then a whole series of
rooms that led into each other and were lined with books - most of them very old books and some
bigger than a Bible in a church. And shortly after that they looked into a room that was quite empty
except for one big wardrobe; the sort that has a looking-glass in the door. There was nothing else in
the room at all except a dead blue-bottle on the window-sill.
 "Nothing there!" said Peter, and they all trooped out again - all except Lucy. She stayed behind
because she thought it would be worth while trying the door of the wardrobe, even though she felt
almost sure that it would be locked. To her surprise it opened quite easily, and two moth-balls
dropped out.
Looking into the inside, she saw several coats hanging up - mostly long fur coats. There was nothing
Lucy liked so much as the smell and feel of fur. She immediately stepped into the wardrobe and got
in among the coats and rubbed her face against them, leaving the door open, of course, because she
knew that it is very foolish to shut oneself into any wardrobe. Soon she went further in and found that
there was a second row of coats hanging up behind the first one. It was almost quite dark in there and
she kept her arms stretched out in front of her so as not to bump her face into the back of the
wardrobe. She took a step further in - then two or three steps always expecting to feel woodwork
against the tips of her fingers. But she could not feel it.
"This must be a simply enormous wardrobe!" thought Lucy, going still further in and pushing the
soft folds of the coats aside to make room for her. Then she noticed that there was something
crunching under her feet. "I wonder is that more mothballs?" she thought, stooping down to feel it
with her hand. But instead of feeling the hard, smooth wood of the floor of the wardrobe, she felt
something soft and powdery and extremely cold. "This is very queer," she said, and went on a step or
two further.
Next moment she found that what was rubbing against her face and hands was no longer soft fur but
something hard and rough and even prickly. "Why, it is just like branches of trees!" exclaimed Lucy.
And then she saw that there was a light ahead of her; not a few inches away where the back of the
wardrobe ought to have been, but a long way off. Something cold and soft was falling on her. A
moment later she found that she was standing in the middle of a wood at night-time with snow under 
her feet and snowflakes falling through the air.
Lucy felt a little frightened, but she felt very inquisitive and excited as well. She looked back over
her shoulder and there, between the dark tree trunks; she could still see the open doorway of the
wardrobe and even catch a glimpse of the empty room from which she had set out. (She had, of
course, left the door open, for she knew that it is a very silly thing to shut oneself into a wardrobe.) It
seemed to be still daylight there. "I can always get back if anything goes wrong," thought Lucy. She
began to walk forward, crunch-crunch over the snow and through the wood towards the other light. In
about ten minutes she reached it and found it was a lamp-post. As she stood looking at it, wondering
why there was a lamp-post in the middle of a wood and wondering what to do next, she heard a pitter
patter of feet coming towards her. And soon after that a very strange person stepped out from among
the trees into the light of the lamp-post.
He was only a little taller than Lucy herself and he carried over his head an umbrella, white with
snow. From the waist upwards he was like a man, but his legs were shaped like a goat's (the hair on
them was glossy black) and instead of feet he had goat's hoofs. He also had a tail, but Lucy did not
notice this at first because it was neatly caught up over the arm that held the umbrella so as to keep it
from trailing in the snow. He had a red woollen muffler round his neck and his skin was rather
reddish too. He had a strange, but pleasant little face, with a short pointed beard and curly hair, and
out of the hair there stuck two horns, one on each side of his forehead. One of his hands, as I have
said, held the umbrella: in the other arm he carried several brown-paper parcels. What with the
parcels and the snow it looked just as if he had been doing his Christmas shopping. He was a Faun.
And when he saw Lucy he gave such a start of surprise that he dropped all his parcels.
"Goodness gracious me!" exclaimed the Faun.
 "GOOD EVENING," said Lucy. But the Faun was so busy picking up its parcels that at first it did
not reply. When it had finished it made her a little bow.
"Good evening, good evening," said the Faun. "Excuse me - I don't want to be inquisitive - but
should I be right in thinking that you are a Daughter of Eve?"
 "My name's Lucy," said she, not quite understanding him.
"But you are - forgive me - you are what they call a girl?" said the Faun.
"Of course I'm a girl," said Lucy.
"You are in fact Human?"
 "Of course I'm human," said Lucy, still a little puzzled.
"To be sure, to be sure," said the Faun. "How stupid of me! But I've never seen a Son of Adam or a
Daughter of Eve before. I am delighted. That is to say -" and then it stopped as if it had been going to
say something it had not intended but had remembered in time. "Delighted, delighted," it went on.
"Allow me to introduce myself. My name is Tumnus."
 "I am very pleased to meet you, Mr Tumnus," said Lucy.
"And may I ask, O Lucy Daughter of Eve," said Mr Tumnus, "how you have come into Narnia?"
 "Narnia? What's that?" said Lucy.
"This is the land of Narnia," said the Faun, "where we are now; all that lies between the lamp-post
and the great castle of Cair Paravel on the eastern sea. And you - you have come from the wild woods
of the west?"
 "I - I got in through the wardrobe in the spare room," said Lucy.
"Ah!" said Mr Tumnus in a rather melancholy voice, "if only I had worked harder at geography
when I was a little Faun, I should no doubt know all about those strange countries. It is too late now."
 "But they aren't countries at all," said Lucy, almost laughing. "It's only just back there - at least - I'm
not sure. It is summer there."
 "Meanwhile," said Mr Tumnus, "it is winter in Narnia, and has been for ever so long, and we shall
both catch cold if we stand here talking in the snow. Daughter of Eve from the far land of Spare Oom
where eternal summer reigns around the bright city of War Drobe, how would it be if you came and
had tea with me?"
 "Thank you very much, Mr Tumnus," said Lucy. "But I was wondering whether I ought to be getting
back."
 "It's only just round the corner," said the Faun, "and there'll be a roaring fire - and toast - and
sardines - and cake."
 "Well, it's very kind of you," said Lucy. "But I shan't be able to stay long."
 "If you will take my arm, Daughter of Eve," said Mr Tumnus, "I shall be able to hold the umbrella
over both of us. That's the way. Now - off we go."
 And so Lucy found herself walking through the wood arm in arm with this strange creature as if they
had known one another all their lives.
They had not gone far before they came to a place where the ground became rough and there were
rocks all about and little hills up and little hills down. At the bottom of one small valley Mr Tumnus
turned suddenly aside as if he were going to walk straight into an unusually large rock, but at the last
moment Lucy found he was leading her into the entrance of a cave. As soon as they were inside she
found herself blinking in the light of a wood fire. Then Mr Tumnus stooped and took a flaming piece
of wood out of the fire with a neat little pair of tongs, and lit a lamp. "Now we shan't be long," he
said, and immediately put a kettle on.
Lucy thought she had never been in a nicer place. It was a little, dry, clean cave of reddish stone
with a carpet on the floor and two little chairs ("one for me and one for a friend," said Mr Tumnus)
and a table and a dresser and a mantelpiece over the fire and above that a picture of an old Faun with
a grey beard. In one corner there was a door which Lucy thought must lead to Mr Tumnus's bedroom,
and on one wall was a shelf full of books. Lucy looked at these while he was setting out the tea
things. They had titles like The Life and Letters of Silenus or Nymphs and Their Ways or Men,
Monks and Gamekeepers; a Study in Popular Legend or Is Man a Myth?
 "Now, Daughter of Eve!" said the Faun.
And really it was a wonderful tea. There was a nice brown egg, lightly boiled, for each of them, and
then sardines on toast, and then buttered toast, and then toast with honey, and then a sugar-topped
cake. And when Lucy was tired of eating the Faun began to talk. He had wonderful tales to tell of life
in the forest. He told about the midnight dances and how the Nymphs who lived in the wells and the
Dryads who lived in the trees came out to dance with the Fauns; about long hunting parties after the
milk-white stag who could give you wishes if you caught him; about feasting and treasure-seeking
with the wild Red Dwarfs in deep mines and caverns far beneath the forest floor; and then about
summer when the woods were green and old Silenus on his fat donkey would come to visit them, and
sometimes Bacchus himself, and then the streams would run with wine instead of water and the
whole forest would give itself up to jollification for weeks on end. "Not that it isn't always winter
now," he added gloomily. Then to cheer himself up he took out from its case on the dresser a strange
little flute that looked as if it were made of straw and began to play. And the tune he played made
Lucy want to cry and laugh and dance and go to sleep all at the same time. It must have been hours
later when she shook herself and said:
 "Oh, Mr Tumnus - I'm so sorry to stop you, and I do love that tune - but really, I must go home. I
only meant to stay for a few minutes."
 "It's no good now, you know," said the Faun, laying down its flute and shaking its head at her very
sorrowfully.
"No good?" said Lucy, jumping up and feeling rather frightened. "What do you mean? I've got to go
home at once. The others will be wondering what has happened to me." But a moment later she
asked, "Mr Tumnus! Whatever is the matter?" for the Faun's brown eyes had filled with tears and
then the tears began trickling down its cheeks, and soon they were running off the end of its nose; and
at last it covered its face with its hands and began to howl.
"Mr Tumnus! Mr Tumnus!" said Lucy in great distress. "Don't! Don't! What is the matter? Aren'
you well? Dear Mr Tumnus, do tell me what is wrong." But the Faun continued sobbing as if its heart
would break. And even when Lucy went over and put her arms round him and lent him her hand
kerchief, he did not stop. He merely took the handker chief and kept on using it, wringing it out with
both hands whenever it got too wet to be any more use, so that presently Lucy was standing in a
damp patch.
"Mr Tumnus!" bawled Lucy in his ear, shaking him. "Do stop. Stop it at once! You ought to be
ashamed of yourself, a great big Faun like you. What on earth are you crying about?"
 "Oh - oh - oh!" sobbed Mr Tumnus, "I'm crying because I'm such a bad Faun."
 "I don't think you're a bad Faun at all," said Lucy. "I think you are a very good Faun. You are the
nicest Faun I've ever met."
 "Oh - oh - you wouldn't say that if you knew," replied Mr Tumnus between his sobs. "No, I'm a bad
Faun. I don't suppose there ever was a worse Faun since the beginning of the world."
 "But what have you done?" asked Lucy.
"My old father, now," said Mr Tumnus; "that's his picture over the mantelpiece. He would never
have done a thing like this."
 "A thing like what?" said Lucy.
"Like what I've done," said the Faun. "Taken service under the White Witch. That's what I am. I'm
in the pay of the White Witch."
 "The White Witch? Who is she?"
 "Why, it is she that has got all Narnia under her thumb. It's she that makes it always winter. Always
winter and never Christmas; think of that!"
 "How awful!" said Lucy. "But what does she pay you for?"
 "That's the worst of it," said Mr Tumnus with a deep groan. "I'm a kidnapper for her, that's what I
am. Look at me, Daughter of Eve. Would you believe that I'm the sort of Faun to meet a poor
innocent child in the wood, one that had never done me any harm, and pretend to be friendly with it,
and invite it home to my cave, all for the sake of lulling it asleep and then handing it over to the
White Witch?"
 "No," said Lucy. "I'm sure you wouldn't do anything of the sort."
 "But I have," said the Faun.
"Well," said Lucy rather slowly (for she wanted to be truthful and yet not be too hard on him),
"well, that was pretty bad. But you're so sorry for it that I'm sure you will never do it again."
 "Daughter of Eve, don't you understand?" said the Faun. "It isn't something I have done. I'm doing it
now, this very moment."
 "What do you mean?" cried Lucy, turning very white.
"You are the child," said Tumnus. "I had orders from the White Witch that if ever I saw a Son of
Adam or a Daughter of Eve in the wood, I was to catch them and hand them over to her. And you are
the first I've ever met. And I've pretended to be your friend an asked you to tea, and all the time I've
been meaning to wait till you were asleep and then go and tell Her."
 "Oh, but you won't, Mr Tumnus," said Lucy. "Yo won't, will you? Indeed, indeed you really
mustn't."
 "And if I don't," said he, beginning to cry again "she's sure to find out. And she'll have my tail cut off
and my horns sawn off, and my beard plucked out, and she'll wave her wand over my beautiful clove
hoofs and turn them into horrid solid hoofs like wretched horse's. And if she is extra and specially
angry she'll turn me into stone and I shall be only statue of a Faun in her horrible house until the four
thrones at Cair Paravel are filled and goodness knows when that will happen, or whether it will ever
happen at all."
 "I'm very sorry, Mr Tumnus," said Lucy. "But please let me go home."
 "Of course I will," said the Faun. "Of course I've got to. I see that now. I hadn't known what Humans
were like before I met you. Of course I can't give you up to the Witch; not now that I know you. But
we must be off at once. I'll see you back to the lamp-post. I suppose you can find your own way from
there back to Spare Oom and War Drobe?"
 "I'm sure I can," said Lucy.
"We must go as quietly as we can," said Mr Tumnus. "The whole wood is full of her spies. Even
some of the trees are on her side."
 They both got up and left the tea things on the table, and Mr Tumnus once more put up his umbrella
and gave Lucy his arm, and they went out into the snow. The journey back was not at all like the
journey to the Faun's cave; they stole along as quickly as they could, without speaking a word, and
Mr Tumnus kept to the darkest places. Lucy was relieved when they reached the lamp-post again.
"Do you know your way from here, Daughter o Eve?" said Tumnus.
Lucy looked very hard between the trees and could just see in the distance a patch of light that
looked like daylight. "Yes," she said, "I can see the wardrobe door."
 "Then be off home as quick as you can," said the Faun, "and - c-can you ever forgive me for what
meant to do?"
 "Why, of course I can," said Lucy, shaking him heartily by the hand. "And I do hope you won't get
into dreadful trouble on my account."
 "Farewell, Daughter of Eve," said he. "Perhaps I may keep the handkerchief?"
 "Rather!" said Lucy, and then ran towards the far off patch of daylight as quickly as her legs would
carry her. And presently instead of rough branch brushing past her she felt coats, and instead of
crunching snow under her feet she felt wooden board and all at once she found herself jumping out of
the wardrobe into the same empty room from which the whole adventure had started. She shut the
wardrobe door tightly behind her and looked around, panting for breath. It was still raining and she
could hear the voices of the others in the passage.
"I'm here," she shouted. "I'm here. I've come back I'm all right."
 Lucy ran out of the empty room into the passage and found the other three.
"It's all right," she repeated, "I've comeback."
 "What on earth are you talking about, Lucy?" asked Susan.
"Why? said Lucy in amazement, "haven't you all been wondering where I was?"
 "So you've been hiding, have you?" said Peter. "Poor old Lu, hiding and nobody noticed! You'll have
to hide longer than that if you want people to start looking for you."
 "But I've been away for hours and hours," said Lucy.
The others all stared at one another.
"Batty!" said Edmund, tapping his head. "Quite batty."
 "What do you mean, Lu?" asked Peter.
"What I said," answered Lucy. "It was just after breakfast when I went into the wardrobe, and I've
been away for hours and hours, and had tea, and all sorts of things have happened."
 "Don't be silly, Lucy," said Susan. "We've only just come out of that room a moment ago, and you
were there then."
 "She's not being silly at all," said Peter, "she's just making up a story for fun, aren't you, Lu? And
why shouldn't she?"
 "No, Peter, I'm not," she said. "It's - it's a magic wardrobe. There's a wood inside it, and it's snowing,
and there's a Faun and a Witch and it's called Narnia; come and see."
 The others did not know what to think, but Lucy was so excited that they all went back with her into
the room. She rushed ahead of them, flung open the door of the wardrobe and cried, "Now! go in and
see for yourselves."
 "Why, you goose," said Susan, putting her head inside and pulling the fur coats apart, "it's just an
ordinary wardrobe; look! there's the back of it."
 Then everyone looked in and pulled the coats apart; and they all saw - Lucy herself saw - a perfectly
ordinary wardrobe. There was no wood and no snow, only the back of the wardrobe, with hooks on it.
Peter went in and rapped his knuckles on it to make sure that it was solid.
"A jolly good hoax, Lu," he said as he came out again; "you have really taken us in, I must admit.
We half believed you."
 "But it wasn't a hoax at all," said Lucy, "really and truly. It was all different a moment ago. Honestly
it was. I promise."
 "Come, Lu," said Peter, "that's going a bit far. You've had your joke. Hadn't you better drop it now?"
 Lucy grew very red in the face and tried to say something, though she hardly knew what she was
trying to say, and burst into tears.
For the next few days she was very miserable. She could have made it up with the others quite
easily at any moment if she could have brought herself to say that the whole thing was only a story
made up for fun. But Lucy was a very truthful girl and she knew that she was really in the right; and
she could not bring herself to say this. The others who thought she was telling a lie, and a silly lie too,
made her very unhappy. The two elder ones did this without meaning to do it, but Edmund could be
spiteful, and on this occasion he was spiteful. He sneered and jeered at Lucy and kept on asking her if
she'd found any other new countries in other cupboards all over the house. What made it worse was
that these days ought to have been delightful. The weather was fine and they were out of doors from
morning to night, bathing, fishing, climbing trees, and lying in the heather. But Lucy could not
properly enjoy any of it. And so things went on until the next wet day.
That day, when it came to the afternoon and there was still no sign of a break in the weather, they
decided to play hide-and-seek. Susan was "It" and as soon as the others scattered to hide, Lucy went
to the room where the wardrobe was. She did not mean to hide in the wardrobe, because she knew
that would only set the others talking again about the whole wretched business. But she did want to
have one more look inside it; for by this time she was beginning to wonder herself whether Narnia
and the Faun had not been a dream. The house was so large and complicated and full of hiding-places
that she thought she would have time to have one look into the wardrobe and then hide somewhere
else. But as soon as she reached it she heard steps in the passage outside, and then there was nothing
for it but to jump into the wardrobe and hold the door closed behind her. She did not shut it properly
because she knew that it is very silly to shut oneself into a wardrobe, even if it is not a magic one.
Now the steps she had heard were those of Edmund; and he came into the room just in time to see
Lucy vanishing into the wardrobe. He at once decided to get into it himself - not because he thought
it a particularly good place to hide but because he wanted to go on teasing her about her imaginary
country. He opened the door. There were the coats hanging up as usual, and a smell of mothballs, and
darkness and silence, and no sign of Lucy. "She thinks I'm Susan come to catch her," said Edmund to
himself, "and so she's keeping very quiet in at the back." He jumped in and shut the door, forgetting
what a very foolish thing this is to do. Then he began feeling about for Lucy in the dark. He had
expected to find her in a few seconds and was very surprised when he did not. He decided to open the
door again and let in some light. But he could not find the door either. He didn't like this at all and
began groping wildly in every direction; he even shouted out, "Lucy! Lu! Where are you? I know
you're here."
 There was no answer and Edmund noticed that his own voice had a curious sound - not the sound
you expect in a cupboard, but a kind of open-air sound. He also noticed that he was unexpectedly
cold; and then he saw a light.
"Thank goodness," said Edmund, "the door must have swung open of its own accord." He forgot all
about Lucy and went towards the light, which he thought was the open door of the wardrobe. But
instead of finding himself stepping out into the spare room he found himself stepping out from the
shadow of some thick dark fir trees into an open place in the middle of a wood.
There was crisp, dry snow under his feet and more snow lying on the branches of the trees.
Overhead there was pale blue sky, the sort of sky one sees on a fine winter day in the morning.
Straight ahead of him he saw between the tree-trunks the sun, just rising, very red and clear.
Everything was perfectly still, as if he were the only living creature in that country. There was not
even a robin or a squirrel among the trees, and the wood stretched as far as he could see in every
direction. He shivered.
He now remembered that he had been looking for Lucy; and also how unpleasant he had been to her
about her "imaginary country" which now turned out not to have been imaginary at all. He thought
that she must be somewhere quite close and so he shouted, "Lucy! Lucy! I'm here too-Edmund."
 There was no answer.
"She's angry about all the things I've been saying lately," thought Edmund. And though he did not
like to admit that he had been wrong, he also did not much like being alone in this strange, cold, quiet
place; so he shouted again.
"I say, Lu! I'm sorry I didn't believe you. I see now you were right all along. Do come out. Make it
Pax."
 Still there was no answer.
"Just like a girl," said Edmund to himself, "sulking somewhere, and won't accept an apology." He
looked round him again and decided he did not much like this place, and had almost made up his
mind to go home, when he heard, very far off in the wood, a sound of bells. He listened and the sound
came nearer and nearer and at last there swept into sight a sledge drawn by two reindeer.
The reindeer were about the size of Shetland ponies and their hair was so white that even the snow
hardly looked white compared with them; their branching horns were gilded and shone like
something on fire when the sunrise caught them. Their harness was of scarlet leather and covered
with bells. On the sledge, driving the reindeer, sat a fat dwarf who would have been about three feet
high if he had been standing. He was dressed in polar bear's fur and on his head he wore a red hood
with a long gold tassel hanging down from its point; his huge beard covered his knees and served him
instead of a rug. But behind him, on a much higher seat in the middle of the sledge sat a very
different person - a great lady, taller than any woman that Edmund had ever seen. She also was
covered in white fur up to her throat and held a long straight golden wand in her right hand and wore
a golden crown on her head. Her face was white - not merely pale, but white like snow or paper or
icing-sugar, except for her very red mouth. It was a beautiful face in other respects, but proud and
cold and stern.
The sledge was a fine sight as it came sweeping towards Edmund with the bells jingling and the
dwarf cracking his whip and the snow flying up on each side of it.
"Stop!" said the Lady, and the dwarf pulled the reindeer up so sharp that they almost sat down. Then
they recovered themselves and stood champing their bits and blowing. In the frosty air the breath
coming out of their nostrils looked like smoke.
"And what, pray, are you?" said the Lady, looking hard at Edmund.
"I'm-I'm-my name's Edmund," said Edmund rather awkwardly. He did not like the way she looked 
at him.
The Lady frowned, "Is that how you address a Queen?" she asked, looking sterner than ever.
"I beg your pardon, your Majesty, I didn't know," said Edmund:
 "Not know the Queen of Narnia?" cried she. "Ha! You shall know us better hereafter. But I repeatwhat
are you?"
 "Please, your Majesty," said Edmund, "I don't know what you mean. I'm at school - at least I was it's
the holidays now."
 "BUT what are you?" said the Queen again. "Are you a great overgrown dwarf that has cut off its
beard?"
 "No, your Majesty," said Edmund, "I never had a beard, I'm a boy."
 "A boy!" said she. "Do you mean you are a Son of Adam?"
 Edmund stood still, saying nothing. He was too confused by this time to understand what the
question meant.
"I see you are an idiot, whatever else you may be," said the Queen. "Answer me, once and for all, or 
I shall lose my patience. Are you human?"
 "Yes, your Majesty," said Edmund.
"And how, pray, did you come to enter my dominions?"
 "Please, your Majesty, I came in through a wardrobe."
 "A wardrobe? What do you mean?"
 "I - I opened a door and just found myself here, your Majesty," said Edmund.
"Ha!" said the Queen, speaking more to herself than to him. "A door. A door from the world of
men! I have heard of such things. This may wreck all. But he is only one, and he is easily dealt with."
As she spoke these words she rose from her seat and looked Edmund full in the face, her eyes
flaming; at the same moment she raised her wand. Edmund felt sure that she was going to do
something dreadful but he seemed unable to move. Then, just as he gave himself up for lost, she
appeared to change her mind.
"My poor child," she said in quite a different voice, "how cold you look! Come and sit with me here
on the sledge and I will put my mantle round you and we will talk."
 Edmund did not like this arrangement at all but he dared not disobey; he stepped on to the sledge and
sat at her feet, and she put a fold of her fur mantle round him and tucked it well in.
"Perhaps something hot to drink?" said the Queen. "Should you like that?"
 "Yes please, your Majesty," said Edmund, whose teeth were chattering.
The Queen took from somewhere among her wrappings a very small bottle which looked as if it
were made of copper. Then, holding out her arm, she let one drop fall from it on the snow beside the
sledge. Edmund saw the drop for a second in mid-air, shining like a diamond. But the moment it
touched the snow there was a hissing sound and there stood a jewelled cup full of something that
steamed. The dwarf immediately took this and handed it to Edmund with a bow and a smile; not a
very nice smile. Edmund felt much better as he began to sip the hot drink. It was something he had
never tasted before, very sweet and foamy and creamy, and it warmed him right down to his toes.
"It is dull, Son of Adam, to drink without eating," said the Queen presently. "What would you like
best to eat?"
 "Turkish Delight, please, your Majesty," said Edmund.
The Queen let another drop fall from her bottle on to the snow, and instantly there appeared a round
box, tied with green silk ribbon, which, when opened, turned out to contain several pounds of the best
Turkish Delight. Each piece was sweet and light to the very centre and Edmund had never tasted
anything more delicious. He was quite warm now, and very comfortable.
While he was eating the Queen kept asking him questions. At first Edmund tried to remember that it
is rude to speak with one's mouth full, but soon he forgot about this and thought only of trying to
shovel down as much Turkish Delight as he could, and the more he ate the more he wanted to eat,
and he never asked himself why the Queen should be so inquisitive. She got him to tell her that he
had one brother and two sisters, and that one of his sisters had already been in Narnia and had met a
Faun there, and that no one except himself and his brother and his sisters knew anything about
Narnia. She seemed especially interested in the fact that there were four of them, and kept on coming
back to it. "You are sure there are just four of you?" she asked. "Two Sons of Adam and two
Daughters of Eve, neither more nor less?" and Edmund, with his mouth full of Turkish Delight, kept
on saying, "Yes, I told you that before," and forgetting to call her "Your Majesty", but she didn't
seem to mind now.
At last the Turkish Delight was all finished and Edmund was looking very hard at the empty box
and wishing that she would ask him whether he would like some more. Probably the Queen knew
quite well what he was thinking; for she knew, though Edmund did not, that this was enchanted
Turkish Delight and that anyone who had once tasted it would want more and more of it, and would
even, if they were allowed, go on eating it till they killed themselves. But she did not offer him any
more. Instead, she said to him,
 "Son of Adam, I should so much like to see your brother and your two sisters. Will you bring them
to see me?"
 "I'll try," said Edmund, still looking at the empty box.
"Because, if you did come again - bringing them with you of course - I'd be able to give you some
more Turkish Delight. I can't do it now, the magic will only work once. In my own house it would be
another matter."
 "Why can't we go to your house now?" said Edmund. When he had first got on to the sledge he had
been afraid that she might drive away with him to some unknown place from which he would not be
able to get back; but he had forgotten about that fear now.
"It is a lovely place, my house," said the Queen. "I am sure you would like it. There are whole
rooms full of Turkish Delight, and what's more, I have no children of my own. I want a nice boy
whom I could bring up as a Prince and who would be King of Narnia when I am gone. While he was
Prince he would wear a gold crown and eat Turkish Delight all day long; and you are much the
cleverest and handsomest young man I've ever met. I think I would like to make you the Prince -
some day, when you bring the others to visit me."
 "Why not now?" said Edmund. His face had become very red and his mouth and fingers were sticky.
He did not look either clever or handsome, whatever the Queen might say.
"Oh, but if I took you there now," said she, "I shouldn't see your brother and your sisters. I very
much want to know your charming relations. You are to be the Prince and - later on - the King; that is
understood. But you must have courtiers and nobles. I will make your brother a Duke and your sisters
Duchesses."
 "There's nothing special about them," said Edmund, "and, anyway, I could always bring them some
other time."
 "Ah, but once you were in my house," said the Queen, "you might forget all about thern. You would
be enjoying yourself so much that you wouldn't want the bother of going to fetch them. No. You must
go back to your own country now and come to me another day, with them, you understand. It is no 
good coming without them."
 "But I don't even know the way back to my own country," pleaded Edmund. "That's easy," answered
the Queen. "Do you see that lamp?" She pointed with her wand and Edmund turned and saw the same
lamp-post under which Lucy had met the Faun. "Straight on, beyond that, is the way to the World of
Men. And now look the other way'- here she pointed in the opposite direction - "and tell me if you
can see two little hills rising above the trees."
 "I think I can," said Edmund.
"Well, my house is between those two hills. So next time you come you have only to find the lamppost
and look for those two hills and walk through the wood till you reach my house. But remember -
you must bring the others with you. I might have to be very angry with you if you came alone."
 "I'll do my best," said Edmund.
"And, by the way," said the Queen, "you needn't tell them about me. It would be fun to keep it a
secret between us two, wouldn't it? Make it a surprise for them. Just bring them along to the two hills
- a clever boy like you will easily think of some excuse for doing that - and when you come to my
house you could just say "Let's see who lives here" or something like that. I am sure that would be
best. If your sister has met one of the Fauns, she may have heard strange stories about me - nasty
stories that might make her afraid to come to me. Fauns will say anything, you know, and now -"
 "Please, please," said Edmund suddenly, "please couldn't I have just one piece of Turkish Delight to
eat on the way home?"
 "No, no," said the Queen with a laugh, "you must wait till next time." While she spoke, she signalled
to the dwarf to drive on, but as the sledge swept away out of sight, the Queen waved to Edmund,
calling out, "Next time! Next time! Don't forget. Come soon."
 Edmund was still staring after the sledge when he heard someone calling his own name, and looking
round he saw Lucy coming towards him from another part of the wood.
"Oh, Edmund!" she cried. "So you've got in too! Isn't it wonderful, and now-"
 "All right," said Edmund, "I see you were right and it is a magic wardrobe after all. I'll say I'm sorry
if you like. But where on earth have you been all this time? I've been looking for you everywhere."
 "If I'd known you had got in I'd have waited for you," said Lucy, who was too happy and excited to
notice how snappishly Edmund spoke or how flushed and strange his face was. "I've been having
lunch with dear Mr Tumnus, the Faun, and he's very well and the White Witch has done nothing to
him for letting me go, so he thinks she can't have found out and perhaps everything is going to be all
right after all."
 "The White Witch?" said Edmund; "who's she?"
 "She is a perfectly terrible person," said Lucy. "She calls herself the Queen of Narnia though she has
no right to be queen at all, and all the Fauns and Dryads and Naiads and Dwarfs and Animals - at
least all the good ones - simply hate her. And she can turn people into stone and do all kinds of
horrible things. And she has made a magic so that it is always winter in Narnia - always winter, but it
never gets to Christmas. And she drives about on a sledge, drawn by reindeer, with her wand in her
hand and a crown on her head."
 Edmund was already feeling uncomfortable from having eaten too many sweets, and when he heard
that the Lady he had made friends with was a dangerous witch he felt even more uncomfortable. But
he still wanted to taste that Turkish Delight again more than he wanted anything else.
"Who told you all that stuff about the White Witch?" he asked.
"Mr Tumnus, the Faun," said Lucy.
"You can't always believe what Fauns say," said Edmund, trying to sound as if he knew far more
about them than Lucy.
"Who said so?" asked Lucy.
"Everyone knows it," said Edmund; "ask anybody you like. But it's pretty poor sport standing here
in the snow. Let's go home."
 "Yes, let's," said Lucy. "Oh, Edmund, I am glad you've got in too. The others will have to believe in
Narnia now that both of us have been there. What fun it will be!"
 But Edmund secretly thought that it would not be as good fun for him as for her. He would have to
admit that Lucy had been right, before all the others, and he felt sure the others would all be on the
side of the Fauns and the animals; but he was already more than half on the side of the Witch. He did
not know what he would say, or how he would keep his secret once they were all talking about
Narnia.
By this time they had walked a good way. Then suddenly they felt coats around them instead of
branches and next moment they were both standing outside the wardrobe in the empty room.
"I say," said Lucy, "you do look awful, Edmund. Don't you feel well?"
 "I'm all right," said Edmund, but this was not true. He was feeling very sick.
"Come on then," said Lucy, "let's find the others. What a lot we shall have to tell them! And what
wonderful adventures we shall have now that we're all in it together."
 BECAUSE the game of hide-and-seek was still going on, it took Edmund and Lucy some time to 
find the others. But when at last they were all together (which happened in the long room, where the
suit of armour was) Lucy burst out:
 "Peter! Susan! It's all true. Edmund has seen it too. There is a country you can get to through the
wardrobe. Edmund and I both got in. We met one another in there, in the wood. Go on, Edmund; tell
them all about it."
 "What's all this about, Ed?" said Peter.
And now we come to one of the nastiest things in this story. Up to that moment Edmund had been
feeling sick, and sulky, and annoyed with Lucy for being right, but he hadn't made up his mind what
to do. When Peter suddenly asked him the question he decided all at once to do the meanest and most
spiteful thing he could think of. He decided to let Lucy down.
"Tell us, Ed," said Susan.
And Edmund gave a very superior look as if he were far older than Lucy (there was really only a
year's difference) and then a little snigger and said, "Oh, yes, Lucy and I have been playing -
pretending that all her story about a country in the wardrobe is true. just for fun, of course. There's
nothing there really."
 Poor Lucy gave Edmund one look and rushed out of the room.
Edmund, who was becoming a nastier person every minute, thought that he had scored a great
success, and went on at once to say, "There she goes again. What's the matter with her? That's the
worst of young kids, they always -"
 "Look here," said Peter, turning on him savagely, "shut up! You've been perfectly beastly to Lu ever
since she started this nonsense about the wardrobe, and now you go playing games with her about it
and setting her off again. I believe you did it simply out of spite."
 "But it's all nonsense," said Edmund, very taken aback.
"Of course it's all nonsense," said Peter, "that's just the point. Lu was perfectly all right when we left
home, but since we've been down here she seems to be either going queer in the head or else turning
into a most frightful liar. But whichever it is, what good do you think you'll do by jeering and
nagging at her one day and encouraging her the next?"
 "I thought - I thought," said Edmund; but he couldn't think of anything to say.
"You didn't think anything at all," said Peter; "it's just spite. You've always liked being beastly to
anyone smaller than yourself; we've seen that at school before now."
 "Do stop it," said Susan; "it won't make things any better having a row between you two. Let's go
and find Lucy."
 It was not surprising that when they found Lucy, a good deal later, everyone could see that she had
been crying. Nothing they could say to her made any difference. She stuck to her story and said:
 "I don't care what you think, and I don't care what you say. You can tell the Professor or you can
write to Mother or you can do anything you like. I know I've met a Faun in there and - I wish I'd
stayed there and you are all beasts, beasts."
 It was an unpleasant evening. Lucy was miserable and Edmund was beginning to feel that his plan
wasn't working as well as he had expected. The two older ones were really beginning to think that
Lucy was out of her mind. They stood in the passage talking about it in whispers long after she had
gone to bed.
The result was the next morning they decided that they really would go and tell the whole thing to
the Professor. "He'll write to Father if he thinks there is really something wrong with Lu," said Peter;
"it's getting beyond us." So they went and knocked at the study door, and the Professor said "Come
in," and got up and found chairs for them and said he was quite at their disposal. Then he sat listening
to them with the tips of his fingers pressed together and never interrupting, till they had finished the
whole story. After that he said nothing for quite a long time. Then he cleared his throat and said the
last thing either of them expected:
 "How do you know," he asked, "that your sister's story is not true?"
 "Oh, but -" began Susan, and then stopped. Anyone could see from the old man's face that he was
perfectly serious. Then Susan pulled herself together and said, "But Edmund said they had only been
pretending."
 "That is a point," said the Professor, "which certainly deserves consideration; very careful
consideration. For instance - if you will excuse me for asking the question - does your experience
lead you to regard your brother or your sister as the more reliable? I mean, which is the more
truthful?"
 "That's just the funny thing about it, sir," said Peter. "Up till now, I'd have said Lucy every time."
 "And what do you think, my dear?" said the Professor, turning to Susan.
"Well," said Susan, "in general, I'd say the same as Peter, but this couldn't be true - all this about the
wood and the Faun."
 "That is more than I know," said the Professor, "and a charge of lying against someone whom you
have always found truthful is a very serious thing; a very serious thing indeed."
 "We were afraid it mightn't even be lying," said Susan; "we thought there might be something wrong
with Lucy."
 "Madness, you mean?" said the Professor quite coolly. "Oh, you can make your minds easy about
that. One has only to look at her and talk to her to see that she is not mad."
 "But then," said Susan, and stopped. She had never dreamed that a grown-up would talk like the
Professor and didn't know what to think.
"Logic!" said the Professor half to himself. "Why don't they teach logic at these schools? There are
only three possibilities. Either your sister is telling lies, or she is mad, or she is telling the truth. You
know she doesn't tell lies and it is obvious that she is not mad For the moment then and unless any
further evidence turns up, we must assume that she is telling the truth."
 Susan looked at him very hard and was quite sure from the expression on his face that he was no
making fun of them.
"But how could it be true, sir?" said Peter.
"Why do you say that?" asked the Professor.
"Well, for one thing," said Peter, "if it was true why doesn't everyone find this country every time
they go to the wardrobe? I mean, there was nothing there when we looked; even Lucy didn't pretend
the was."
 "What has that to do with it?" said the Professor.
"Well, sir, if things are real, they're there all the time."
 "Are they?" said the Professor; and Peter did'nt know quite what to say.
"But there was no time," said Susan. "Lucy had no time to have gone anywhere, even if there was
such a place. She came running after us the very moment we were out of the room. It was less than
minute, and she pretended to have been away for hours."
 "That is the very thing that makes her story so likely to be true," said the Professor. "If there really a
door in this house that leads to some other world (and I should warn you that this is a very strange
house, and even I know very little about it) - if, I say, she had got into another world, I should not be
at a surprised to find that the other world had a separate time of its own; so that however long you 
stay there it would never take up any of our time. On the other hand, I don't think many girls of her
age would invent that idea for themselves. If she had been pretending, she would have hidden for a
reasonable time before coming out and telling her story."
 "But do you really mean, sir," said Peter, "that there could be other worlds - all over the place, just
round the corner - like that?"
 "Nothing is more probable," said the Professor, taking off his spectacles and beginning to polish
them, while he muttered to himself, "I wonder what they do teach them at these schools."
 "But what are we to do?" said Susan. She felt that the conversation was beginning to get off the
point.
"My dear young lady," said the Professor, suddenly looking up with a very sharp expression at both
of them, "there is one plan which no one has yet suggested and which is well worth trying."
 "What's that?" said Susan.
"We might all try minding our own business," said he. And that was the end of that conversation.
After this things were a good deal better for Lucy. Peter saw to it that Edmund stopped jeering at
her, and neither she nor anyone else felt inclined to talk about the wardrobe at all. It had become a
rather alarming subject. And so for a time it looked as if all the adventures were coming to an end;
but that was not to be.
This house of the Professor's - which even he knew so little about - was so old and famous that
people from all over England used to come and ask permission to see over it. It was the sort of house
that is mentioned in guide books and even in histories; and well it might be, for all manner of stories
were told about it, some of them even stranger than the one I am telling you now. And when parties
of sightseers arrived and asked to see the house, the Professor always gave them permission, and Mrs
Macready, the housekeeper, showed them round, telling them about the pictures and the armour, and
the rare books in the library. Mrs Macready was not fond of children, and did not like to be
interrupted when she was telling visitors all the things she knew. She had said to Susan and Peter
almost on the first morning (along with a good many other instructions), "And please remember 
you're to keep out of the way whenever I'm taking a party over the house."
 "Just as if any of us would want to waste half the morning trailing round with a crowd of strange
grown-ups!" said Edmund, and the other three thought the same. That was how the adventures began
for the second time.
A few mornings later Peter and Edmund were looking at the suit of armour and wondering if they
could take it to bits when the two girls rushed into the room and said, "Look out! Here comes the
Macready and a whole gang with her."
 "Sharp's the word," said Peter, and all four made off through the door at the far end of the room. But
when they had got out into the Green Room and beyond it, into the Library, they suddenly heard
voices ahead of them, and realised that Mrs Macready must be bringing her party of sightseers up the
back stairs - instead of up the front stairs as they had expected. And after that - whether it was that
they lost their heads, or that Mrs Macready was trying to catch them, or that some magic in the house
had come to life and was chasing them into Narnia they seemed to find themselves being followed
everywhere, until at last Susan said, "Oh bother those trippers! Here - let's get into the Wardrobe
Room till they've passed. No one will follow us in there." But the moment they were inside they
heard the voices in the passage - and then someone fumbling at the door - and then they saw the
handle turning.
"Quick!" said Peter, "there's nowhere else," and flung open the wardrobe. All four of them bundled
inside it and sat there, panting, in the dark. Peter held the door closed but did not shut it; for, of
course, he remembered, as every sensible person does, that you should never never shut yourself up
in a wardrobe.
 "I wish the Macready would hurry up and take all these people away," said Susan presently, "I'm
getting horribly cramped."
 "And what a filthy smell of camphor!" said Edmund.
"I expect the pockets of these coats are full of it," said Susan, "to keep away the moths."
 "There's something sticking into my back," said Peter.
"And isn't it cold?" said Susan.
"Now that you mention it, it is cold," said Peter, "and hang it all, it's wet too. What's the matter with
this place? I'm sitting on something wet. It's getting wetter every minute." He struggled to his feet.
"Let's get out," said Edmund, "they've gone."
 "O-o-oh!" said Susan suddenly, and everyone asked her what was the matter.
"I'm sitting against a tree," said Susan, "and look! It's getting light - over there."
 "By Jove, you're right," said Peter, "and look there - and there. It's trees all round. And this wet stuff
is snow. Why, I do believe we've got into Lucy's wood after all."
 And now there was no mistaking it and all four children stood blinking in the daylight of a winter
day. Behind them were coats hanging on pegs, in front of them were snow-covered trees.
Peter turned at once to Lucy.
"I apologise for not believing you," he said, "I'm sorry. Will you shake hands?"
 "Of course," said Lucy, and did.
"And now," said Susan, "what do we do next?"
 "Do?" said Peter, "why, go and explore the wood, of course."
 "Ugh!" said Susan, stamping her feet, "it's pretty cold. What about putting on some of these coats?"
 "They're not ours," said Peter doubtfully.
"I am sure nobody would mind," said Susan; "it isn't as if we wanted to take them out of the house;
we shan't take them even out of the wardrobe."
 "I never thought of that, Su," said Peter. "Of course, now you put it that way, I see. No one could say
you had bagged a coat as long as you leave it in the wardrobe where you found it. And I suppose this
whole country is in the wardrobe."
 They immediately carried out Susan's very sensible plan. The coats were rather too big for them so
that they came down to their heels and looked more like royal robes than coats when they had put
them on. But they all felt a good deal warmer and each thought the others looked better in their new
get-up and more suitable to the landscape.
"We can pretend we are Arctic explorers," said Lucy.
"This is going to be exciting enough without pretending," said Peter, as he began leading the way
forward into the forest. There were heavy darkish clouds overhead and it looked as if there might be
more snow before night.
"I say," began Edmund presently, "oughtn't we to be bearing a bit more to the left, that is, if we are 
aiming for the lamp-post?" He had forgotten for the moment that he must pretend never to have been
in the wood before. The moment the words were out of his mouth he realised that he had given
himself away. Everyone stopped; everyone stared at him. Peter whistled.
"So you really were here," he said, "that time Lu said she'd met you in here - and you made out she
was telling lies."
 There was a dead silence. "Well, of all the poisonous little beasts -" said Peter, and shrugged his
shoulders and said no more. There seemed, indeed, no more to say, and presently the four resumed
their journey; but Edmund was saying to himself, "I'll pay you all out for this, you pack of stuck-up,
selfsatisfied prigs."
 "Where are we going anyway?" said Susan, chiefly for the sake of changing the subject.
"I think Lu ought to be the leader," said Peter; "goodness knows she deserves it. Where will you
take us, Lu?"
 "What about going to see Mr Tumnus?" said Lucy. "He's the nice Faun I told you about."
 Everyone agreed to this and off they went walking briskly and stamping their feet. Lucy proved a
good leader. At first she wondered whether she would be able to find the way, but she recognised an
oddlooking tree on one place and a stump in another and brought them on to where the ground
became uneven and into the little valley and at last to the very door of Mr Tumnus's cave. But there a
terrible surprise awaited them.
The door had been wrenched off its hinges and broken to bits. Inside, the cave was dark and cold
and had the damp feel and smell of a place that had not been lived in for several days. Snow had
drifted in from the doorway and was heaped on the floor, mixed with something black, which turned
out to be the charred sticks and ashes from the fire. Someone had apparently flung it about the room
and then stamped it out. The crockery lay smashed on the floor and the picture of the Faun's father
had been slashed into shreds with a knife.
"This is a pretty good wash-out," said Edmund; "not much good coming here."
 "What is this?" said Peter, stooping down. He had just noticed a piece of paper which had been
nailed through the carpet to the floor.
"Is there anything written on it?" asked Susan.
"Yes, I think there is," answered Peter, "but I can't read it in this light. Let's get out into the open
air."
 They all went out in the daylight and crowded round Peter as he read out the following words:
 The former occupant of these premises, the Faun Tumnus, is under arrest and awaiting his trial on a
charge of High Treason against her Imperial Majesty Jadis, Queen of Narnia, Chatelaine of Cair
Paravel, Empress of the Lone Islands, etc., also of comforting her said Majesty's enemies, harbouring
spies and fraternizing with Humans.
signed MAUGRIM, Captain of the Secret Police, LONG LIVE THE QUEEN
 The children stared at each other.
"I don't know that I'm going to like this place after all," said Susan.
"Who is this Queen, Lu?" said Peter. "Do you know anything about her?"
 "She isn't a real queen at all," answered Lucy; "she's a horrible witch, the White Witch. Everyone all
the wood people - hate her. She has made an enchantment over the whole country so that it is always
winter here and never Christmas."
 "I - I wonder if there's any point in going on," said Susan. "I mean, it doesn't seem particularly safe 
here and it looks as if it won't be much fun either. And it's getting colder every minute, and we've
brought nothing to eat. What about just going home?"
 "Oh, but we can't, we can't," said Lucy suddenly; "don't you see? We can't just go home, not after
this. It is all on my account that the poor Faun has got into this trouble. He hid me from the Witch
and showed me the way back. That's what it means by comforting the Queen's enemies and
fraternizing with Humans. We simply must try to rescue him."
 "A lot we could do! said Edmund, "when we haven't even got anything to eat!"
 "Shut up - you!" said Peter, who was still very angry with Edmund. "What do you think, Susan?"
 "I've a horrid feeling that Lu is right," said Susan. "I don't want to go a step further and I wish we'd
never come. But I think we must try to do something for Mr Whatever-his-name is - I mean the
Faun."
 "That's what I feel too," said Peter. "I'm worried about having no food with us. I'd vote for going
back and getting something from the larder, only there doesn't seem to be any certainty of getting into
this country again when once you've got out of it. I think we'll have to go on."
 "So do I," said both the girls.
"If only we knew where the poor chap was imprisoned!" said Peter.
They were all still wondering what to do next, when Lucy said, "Look! There's a robin, with such a
red breast. It's the first bird I've seen here. I say! - I wonder can birds talk in Narnia? It almost looks
as if it wanted to say something to us." Then she turned to the Robin and said, "Please, can you tell us
where Tumnus the Faun has been taken to?" As she said this she took a step towards the bird. It at
once flew away but only as far as to the next tree. There it perched and looked at them very hard as if
it understood all they had been saying. Almost without noticing that they had done so, the four
children went a step or two nearer to it. At this the Robin flew away again to the next tree and once
more looked at them very hard. (You couldn't have found a robin with a redder chest or a brighter
eye.)
 "Do you know," said Lucy, "I really believe he means us to follow him."
 "I've an idea he does," said Susan. "What do you think, Peter?"
 "Well, we might as well try it," answered Peter.
The Robin appeared to understand the matter thoroughly. It kept going from tree to tree, always a
few yards ahead of them, but always so near that they could easily follow it. In this way it led them
on, slightly downhill. Wherever the Robin alighted a little shower of snow would fall off the branch.
Presently the clouds parted overhead and the winter sun came out and the snow all around them grew
dazzlingly bright. They had been travelling in this way for about half an hour, with the two girls in
front, when Edmund said to Peter, "if you're not still too high and mighty to talk to me, I've
something to say which you'd better listen to."
 "What is it?" asked Peter.
"Hush! Not so loud," said Edmund; "there's no good frightening the girls. But have you realised
what we're doing?"
 "What?" said Peter, lowering his voice to a whisper.
"We're following a guide we know nothing about. How do we know which side that bird is on? Why
shouldn't it be leading us into a trap?"
 "That's a nasty idea. Still - a robin, you know. They're good birds in all the stories I've ever read. I'm
sure a robin wouldn't be on the wrong side."
"It if comes to that, which is the right side? How do we know that the Fauns are in the right and the
Queen (yes, I know we've been told she's a witch) is in the wrong? We don't really know anything
about either."
 "The Faun saved Lucy."
 "He said he did. But how do we know? And there's another thing too. Has anyone the least idea of
the way home from here?"
 "Great Scott!" said Peter, "I hadn't thought of that."
 "And no chance of dinner either," said Edmund.
 WHILE the two boys were whispering behind, both the girls suddenly cried "Oh!" and stopped.
"The robin!" cried Lucy, "the robin. It's flown away." And so it had - right out of sight.
"And now what are we to do?" said Edmund, giving Peter a look which was as much as to say
"What did I tell you?"
 "Sh! Look!" said Susan.
"What?" said Peter.
"There's something moving among the trees over there to the left."
 They all stared as hard as they could, and no one felt very comfortable.
"There it goes again," said Susan presently.
"I saw it that time too," said Peter. "It's still there. It's just gone behind that big tree."
 "What is it?" asked Lucy, trying very hard not to sound nervous.
"Whatever it is," said Peter, "it's dodging us. It's something that doesn't want to be seen."
 "Let's go home," said Susan. And then, though nobody said it out loud, everyone suddenly realised
the same fact that Edmund had whispered to Peter at the end of the last chapter. They were lost.
"What's it like?" said Lucy.
"It's - it's a kind of animal," said Susan; and then, "Look! Look! Quick! There it is."
 They all saw it this time, a whiskered furry face which had looked out at them from behind a tree.
But this time it didn't immediately draw back. Instead, the animal put its paw against its mouth just as
humans put their finger on their lips when they are signalling to you to be quiet. Then it disappeared
again. The children, all stood holding their breath.
A moment later the stranger came out from behind the tree, glanced all round as if it were afraid
someone was watching, said "Hush", made signs to them to join it in the thicker bit of wood where it
was standing, and then once more disappeared.
"I know what it is," said Peter; "it's a beaver. I saw the tail."
 "It wants us to go to it," said Susan, "and it is warning us not to make a noise."
 "I know," said Peter. "The question is, are we to go to it or not? What do you think, Lu?"
 "I think it's a nice beaver," said Lucy.
"Yes, but how do we know?" said Edmund.
"Shan't we have to risk it?" said Susan. "I mean, it's no good just standing here and I feel I want
some dinner."
 At this moment the Beaver again popped its head out from behind the tree and beckoned earnestly to
them.
"Come on," said Peter,"let's give it a try. All keep close together. We ought to be a match for one
beaver if it turns out to be an enemy."
 So the children all got close together and walked up to the tree and in behind it, and there, sure
enough, they found the Beaver; but it still drew back, saying to them in a hoarse throaty whisper,
"Further in, come further in. Right in here. We're not safe in the open!"
 Only when it had led them into a dark spot where four trees grew so close together that their boughs
met and the brown earth and pine needles could be seen underfoot because no snow had been able to
fall there, did it begin to talk to them.
"Are you the Sons of Adam and the Daughters of Eve?" it said.
"We're some of them," said Peter.
"S-s-s-sh!" said the Beaver, "not so loud please. We're not safe even here."
 "Why, who are you afraid of?" said Peter. "There's no one here but ourselves."
 "There are the trees," said the Beaver. "They're always listening. Most of them are on our side, but
there are trees that would betray us to her; you know who I mean," and it nodded its head several
times.
"If it comes to talking about sides," said Edmund, "how do we know you're a friend?"
 "Not meaning to be rude, Mr Beaver," added Peter, "but you see, we're strangers."
 "Quite right, quite right," said the Beaver. "Here is my token." With these words it held up to them a
little white object. They all looked at it in surprise, till suddenly Lucy said, "Oh, of course. It's my
handkerchief - the one I gave to poor Mr Tumnus."
 "That's right," said the Beaver. "Poor fellow, he got wind of the arrest before it actually happened
and handed this over to me. He said that if anything happened to him I must meet you here and take
you on to -" Here the Beaver's voice sank into silence and it gave one or two very mysterious nods.
Then signalling to the children to stand as close around it as they possibly could, so that their faces
were actually tickled by its whiskers, it added in a low whisper -
 "They say Aslan is on the move - perhaps has already landed."
 And now a very curious thing happened. None of the children knew who Aslan was any more than
you do; but the moment the Beaver had spoken these words everyone felt quite different. Perhaps it
has sometimes happened to you in a dream that someone says something which you don't understand
but in the dream it feels as if it had some enormous meaning - either a terrifying one which turns the
whole dream into a nightmare or else a lovely meaning too lovely to put into words, which makes the
dream so beautiful that you remember it all your life and are always wishing you could get into that
dream again. It was like that now. At the name of Aslan each one of the children felt something jump 
in its inside. Edmund felt a sensation of mysterious horror. Peter felt suddenly brave and adventurous.
Susan felt as if some delicious smell or some delightful strain of music had just floated by her. And
Lucy got the feeling you have when you wake up in the morning and realize that it is the beginning of
the holidays or the beginning of summer.
"And what about Mr Tumnus," said Lucy; "where is he?"
 "S-s-s-sh," said the Beaver, "not here. I must bring you where we can have a real talk and also
dinner."
 No one except Edmund felt any difficulty about trusting the beaver now, and everyone, including
Edmund, was very glad to hear the word "dinner".
They therefore all hurried along behind their new friend who led them at a surprisingly quick pace,
and always in the thickest parts of the forest, for over an hour. Everyone was feeling very tired and
very hungry when suddenly the trees began to get thinner in front of them and the ground to fall
steeply downhill. A minute later they came out under the open sky (the sun was still shining) and
found themselves looking down on a fine sight.
They were standing on the edge of a steep, narrow valley at the bottom of which ran - at least it
would have been running if it hadn't been frozen - a fairly large river. Just below them a dam had
been built across this river, and when they saw it everyone suddenly remembered that of course
beavers are always making dams and felt quite sure that Mr Beaver had made this one. They also
noticed that he now had a sort of modest expression on his, face - the sort of look people have when
you are visiting a garden they've made or reading a story they've written. So it was only common
politeness when Susan said, "What a lovely dam!" And Mr Beaver didn't say "Hush" this time but
"Merely a trifle! Merely a trifle! And it isn't really finished!"
 Above the dam there was what ought to have been a deep pool but was now, of course, a level floor
of dark green ice. And below the dam, much lower down, was more ice, but instead of being smooth
this was all frozen into the foamy and wavy shapes in which the water had been rushing along at the
very moment when the frost came. And where the water had been trickling over and spurting through
the dam there was now a glittering wall of icicles, as if the side of the dam had been covered all over
with flowers and wreaths and festoons of the purest sugar. And out in the middle, and partly on top of
the dam was a funny little house shaped rather like an enormous beehive and from a hole in the roof
smoke was going up, so that when you saw it {especially if you were hungry) you at once thought of
cooking and became hungrier than you were before.
That was what the others chiefly noticed, but Edmund noticed something else. A little lower down
the river there was another small river which came down another small valley to join it. And looking
up that valley, Edmund could see two small hills, and he was almost sure they were the two hills
which the White Witch had pointed out to him when he parted from her at the lamp-post that other
day. And then between them, he thought, must be her palace, only a mile off or less. And he thought
about Turkish Delight and about being a King ("And I wonder how Peter will like that?" he asked
himself) and horrible ideas came into his head.
"Here we are," said Mr Beaver, "and it looks as if Mrs Beaver is expecting us. I'll lead the way. But
be careful and don't slip."
 The top of the dam was wide enough to walk on, though not (for humans) a very nice place to walk
because it was covered with ice, and though the frozen pool was level with it on one side, there was a
nasty drop to the lower river on the other. Along this route Mr Beaver led them in single file right out
to the middle where they could look a long way up the river and a long way down it. And when they
had reached the middle they were at the door of the house.
"Here we are, Mrs Beaver," said Mr Beaver, "I've found them. Here are the Sons and Daughters of
Adam and Eve'- and they all went in.
The first thing Lucy noticed as she went in was a burring sound, and the first thing she saw was a
kindlooking old she-beaver sitting in the corner with a thread in her mouth working busily at her
sewing machine, and it was from it that the sound came. She stopped her work and got up as soon as
the children came in.
"So you've come at last!" she said, holding out both her wrinkled old paws. "At last! To think that
ever I should live to see this day! The potatoes are on boiling and the kettle's singing and I daresay,
Mr Beaver, you'll get us some fish."
 "That I will," said Mr Beaver, and he went out of the house (Peter went with him), and across the ice
of the deep pool to where he had a little hole in the ice which he kept open every day with his hatchet.
They took a pail with them. Mr Beaver sat down quietly at the edge of the hole (he didn't seem to
mind it being so chilly), looked hard into it, then suddenly shot in his paw, and before you could say
Jack Robinson had whisked out a beautiful trout. Then he did it all over again until they had a fine
catch of fish.
Meanwhile the girls were helping Mrs Beaver to fill the kettle and lay the table and cut the bread
and put the plates in the oven to heat and draw a huge jug of beer for Mr Beaver from a barrel which
stood in one corner of the house, and to put on the frying-pan and get the dripping hot. Lucy thought
the Beavers had a very snug little home though it was not at all like Mr Tumnus's cave. There were
no books or pictures, and instead of beds there were bunks, like on board ship, built into the wall.
And there were hams and strings of onions hanging from the roof, and against the walls were gum
boots and oilskins and hatchets and pairs of shears and spades and trowels and things for carrying
mortar in and fishing-rods and fishing-nets and sacks. And the cloth on the table, though very clean,
was very rough.
Just as the frying-pan was nicely hissing Peter and Mr Beaver came in with the fish which Mr
Beaver had already opened with his knife and cleaned out in the open air. You can think how good
the new-caught fish smelled while they were frying and how the hungry children longed for them to
be done and how very much hungrier still they had become before Mr Beaver said, "Now we're
nearly ready." Susan drained the potatoes and then put them all back in the empty pot to dry on the
side of the range while Lucy was helping Mrs Beaver to dish up the trout, so that in a very few
minutes everyone was drawing up their stools (it was all three-legged stools in the Beavers' house
except for Mrs Beaver's own special rockingchair beside the fire) and preparing to enjoy themselves.
There was a jug of creamy milk for the children (Mr Beaver stuck to beer) and a great big lump of
deep yellow butter in the middle of the table from which everyone took as much as he wanted to go
with his potatoes, and all the children thought - and I agree with them - that there's nothing to beat
good freshwater fish if you eat it when it has been alive half an hour ago and has come out of the pan
half a minute ago. And when they had finished the fish Mrs Beaver brought unexpectedly out of the
oven a great and gloriously sticky marmalade roll, steaming hot, and at the same time moved the
kettle on to the fire, so that when they had finished the marmalade roll the tea was made and ready to
be poured out. And when each person had got his (or her) cup of tea, each person shoved back his (or
her) stool so as to be able to lean against the wall and gave a long sigh of contentment.
"And now," said Mr Beaver, pushing away his empty beer mug and pulling his cup of tea towards
him, "if you'll just wait till I've got my pipe lit up and going nicely - why, now we can get to business.
It's snowing again," he added, cocking his eye at the window. "That's all the better, because it means
we shan't have any visitors; and if anyone should have been trying to follow you, why he won't find
any tracks."
 "AND now," said Lucy, "do please tell us what's happened to Mr Tumnus."
 "Ah, that's bad," said Mr Beaver, shaking his head. "That's a very, very bad business. There's no
doubt he was taken off by the police. I got that from a bird who saw it done."
 "But where's he been taken to?" asked Lucy.
"Well, they were heading northwards when they were last seen and we all know what that means."
 "No, we don't," said Susan. Mr Beaver shook his head in a very gloomy fashion.
"I'm afraid it means they were taking him to her House," he said.
"But what'll they do to him, Mr Beaver?" gasped Lucy.
"Well," said Mr Beaver, "you can't exactly say for sure. But there's not many taken in there that ever
comes out again. Statues. All full of statues they say it is - in the courtyard and up the stairs and in the
hall. People she's turned" - (he paused and shuddered) "turned into stone."
 "But, Mr Beaver," said Lucy, "can't we - I mean we must do something to save him. It's too dreadful
and it's all on my account."
 "I don't doubt you'd save him if you could, dearie," said Mrs Beaver, "but you've no chance of
getting into that House against her will and ever coming out alive."
 "Couldn't we have some stratagem?" said Peter. "I mean couldn't we dress up as something, or
pretend to be - oh, pedlars or anything - or watch till she was gone out - or- oh, hang it all, there must 
be some way. This Faun saved my sister at his own risk, Mr Beaver. We can't just leave him to be - to
be - to have that done to him."
 "It's no good, Son of Adam," said Mr Beaver, "no good your trying, of all people. But now that
Aslan is on the move-"
 "Oh, yes! Tell us about Aslan!" said several voices at once; for once again that strange feeling - like
the first signs of spring, like good news, had come over them.
"Who is Aslan?" asked Susan.
"Aslan?" said Mr Beaver. "Why, don't you know? He's the King. He's the Lord of the whole wood,
but not often here, you understand. Never in my time or my father's time. But the word has reached
us that he has come back. He is in Narnia at this moment. He'll settle the White Queen all right. It is
he, not you, that will save Mr Tumnus."
 "She won't turn him into stone too?" said Edmund.
"Lord love you, Son of Adam, what a simple thing to say!" answered Mr Beaver with a great laugh.
"Turn him into stone? If she can stand on her two feet and look him in the face it'll be the most she
can do and more than I expect of her. No, no. He'll put all to rights as it says in an old rhyme in these
parts:
 Wrong will be right, when Aslan comes in sight,
 At the sound of his roar, sorrows will be no more,
 When he bares his teeth, winter meets its death,
 And when he shakes his mane, we shall have spring again.
You'll understand when you see him."
 "But shall we see him?" asked Susan.
"Why, Daughter of Eve, that's what I brought you here for. I'm to lead you where you shall meet
him," said Mr Beaver.
"Is-is he a man?" asked Lucy.
"Aslan a man!" said Mr Beaver sternly. "Certainly not. I tell you he is the King of the wood and the
son of the great Emperor-beyond-the-Sea. Don't you know who is the King of Beasts? Aslan is a lion
- the Lion, the great Lion."
 "Ooh!" said Susan, "I'd thought he was a man. Is he - quite safe? I shall feel rather nervous about
meeting a lion."
 "That you will, dearie, and no mistake," said Mrs Beaver; "if there's anyone who can appear before
Aslan without their knees knocking, they're either braver than most or else just silly."
 "Then he isn't safe?" said Lucy.
"Safe?" said Mr Beaver; "don't you hear what Mrs Beaver tells you? Who said anything about safe?
'Course he isn't safe. But he's good. He's the King, I tell you."
 "I'm longing to see him," said Peter, "even if I do feel frightened when it comes to the point."
 "That's right, Son of Adam," said Mr Beaver, bringing his paw down on the table with a crash that 
made all the cups and saucers rattle. "And so you shall. Word has been sent that you are to meet him,
tomorrow if you can, at the Stone Table.’
"Where's that?" said Lucy.
"I'll show you," said Mr Beaver. "It's down the river, a good step from here. I'll take you to it!"
 "But meanwhile what about poor Mr Tumnus?" said Lucy.
"The quickest way you can help him is by going to meet Aslan," said Mr Beaver, "once he's with us,
then we can begin doing things. Not that we don't need you too. For that's another of the old rhymes:
 When Adam's flesh and Adam's bone
 Sits at Cair Paravel in throne,
 The evil time will be over and done.
So things must be drawing near their end now he's come and you've come. We've heard of Aslan
coming into these parts before - long ago, nobody can say when. But there's never been any of your
race here before."
 "That's what I don't understand, Mr Beaver," said Peter, "I mean isn't the Witch herself human?"
 "She'd like us to believe it," said Mr Beaver, "and it's on that that she bases her claim to be Queen.
But she's no Daughter of Eve. She comes of your father Adam's" - (here Mr Beaver bowed) "your
father Adam's first wife, her they called Lilith. And she was one of the Jinn. That's what she comes
from on one side. And on the other she comes of the giants. No, no, there isn't a drop of real human
blood in the Witch."
 "That's why she's bad all through, Mr Beaver," said Mrs Beaver.
"True enough, Mrs Beaver," replied he, "there may be two views about humans (meaning no
offence to the present company). But there's no two views about things that look like humans and
aren't."
 "I've known good Dwarfs," said Mrs Beaver.
"So've I, now you come to speak of it," said her husband, "but precious few, and they were the ones
least like men. But in general, take my advice, when you meet anything that's going to be human and
isn't yet, or used to be human once and isn't now, or ought to be human and isn't, you keep your eyes
on it and feel for your hatchet. And that's why the Witch is always on the lookout for any humans in
Narnia. She's been watching for you this many a year, and if she knew there were four of you she'd be
more dangerous still."
 "What's that to do with it?" asked Peter.
"Because of another prophecy," said Mr Beaver. "Down at Cair Paravel - that's the castle on the sea
coast down at the mouth of this river which ought to be the capital of the whole country if all was as
it should be - down at Cair Paravel there are four thrones and it's a saying in Narnia time out of mind
that when two Sons of Adam and two Daughters of Eve sit in those four thrones, then it will be the
end not only of the White Witch's reign but of her life, and that is why we had to be so cautious as we
came along, for if she knew about you four, your lives wouldn't be worth a shake of my whiskers!"
 All the children had been attending so hard to what Mr Beaver was telling them that they had noticed
nothing else for a long time. Then during the moment of silence that followed his last remark, Lucy
suddenly said:
 "I say-where's Edmund?"
 There was a dreadful pause, and then everyone began asking "Who saw him last? How long has he
been missing? Is he outside? and then all rushed to the door and looked out. The snow was falling 
thickly and steadily, the green ice of the pool had vanished under a thick white blanket, and from
where the little house stood in the centre of the dam you could hardly see either bank. Out they went,
plunging well over their ankles into the soft new snow, and went round the house in every direction.
"Edmund! Edmund!" they called till they were hoarse. But the silently falling snow seemed to muffle
their voices and there was not even an echo in answer.
"How perfectly dreadful!" said Susan as they at last came back in despair. "Oh, how I wish we'd
never come."
 "What on earth are we to do, Mr Beaver?" said Peter.
"Do?" said Mr Beaver, who was already putting on his snow-boots, "do? We must be off at once.
We haven't a moment to spare!"
 "We'd better divide into four search parties," said Peter, "and all go in different directions. Whoever
finds him must come back here at once and-"
 "Search parties, Son of Adam?" said Mr Beaver; "what for?"
 "Why, to look for Edmund, of course!"
 "There's no point in looking for him," said Mr Beaver.
"What do you mean?" said Susan. "He can't be far away yet. And we've got to find him. What do
you mean when you say there's no use looking for him?"
 "The reason there's no use looking," said Mr Beaver, "is that we know already where he's gone!"
Everyone stared in amazement. "Don't you understand?" said Mr Beaver. "He's gone to her, to the
White Witch. He has betrayed us all."
 "Oh, surely-oh, really!" said Susan, "he can't have done that."
 "Can't he?" said Mr Beaver, looking very hard at the three children, and everything they wanted to
say died on their lips, for each felt suddenly quite certain inside that this was exactly what Edmund
had done.
"But will he know the way?" said Peter.
"Has he been in this country before?" asked Mr Beaver. "Has he ever been here alone?"
 "Yes," said Lucy, almost in a whisper. "I'm afraid he has."
 "And did he tell you what he'd done or who he'd met?"
 "Well, no, he didn't," said Lucy.
"Then mark my words," said Mr Beaver, "he has already met the White Witch and joined her side,
and been told where she lives. I didn't like to mention it before (he being your brother and all) but the
moment I set eyes on that brother of yours I said to myself `Treacherous'. He had the look of one who
has been with the Witch and eaten her food. You can always tell them if you've lived long in Narnia;
something about their eyes."
 "All the same," said Peter in a rather choking sort of voice, "we'll still have to go and look for him.
He is our brother after all, even if he is rather a little beast. And he's only a kid."
 "Go to the Witch's House?" said Mrs Beaver. "Don't you see that the only chance of saving either
him or yourselves is to keep away from her?"
 "How do you mean?" said Lucy.
"Why, all she wants is to get all four of you (she's thinking all the time of those four thrones at Cair
Paravel). Once you were all four inside her House her job would be done - and there'd be four new
statues in her collection before you'd had time to speak. But she'll keep him alive as long as he's the
only one she's got, because she'll want to use him as a decoy; as bait to catch the rest of you with."
 "Oh, can no one help us?" wailed Lucy.
"Only Aslan," said Mr Beaver, "we must go on and meet him. That's our only chance now."
 "It seems to me, my dears," said Mrs Beaver, "that it is very important to know just when he slipped
away. How much he can tell her depends on how much he heard. For instance, had we started talking
of Aslan before he left? If not, then we may do very well, for she won't know that Aslan has come to
Narnia, or that we are meeting him, and will be quite off her guard as far as that is concerned."
 "I don't remember his being here when we were talking about Aslan -" began Peter, but Lucy
interrupted him.
"Oh yes, he was," she said miserably; "don't you remember, it was he who asked whether the Witch
couldn't turn Aslan into stone too?"
 "So he did, by Jove," said Peter; "just the sort of thing he would say, too!"
 "Worse and worse," said Mr Beaver, "and the next thing is this. Was he still here when I told you
that the place for meeting Aslan was the Stone Table?"
 And of course no one knew the answer to this question.
"Because, if he was," continued Mr Beaver, "then she'll simply sledge down in that direction and get
between us and the Stone Table and catch us on our way down. In fact we shall be cut off from
Aslan. "
 "But that isn't what she'll do first," said Mrs Beaver, "not if I know her. The moment that Edmund
tells her that we're all here she'll set out to catch us this very night, and if he's been gone about half an
hour, she'll be here in about another twenty minutes."
 "You're right, Mrs Beaver," said her husband, "we must all get away from here. There's not a
moment to lose."
 AND now of course you want to know what had happened to Edmund. He had eaten his share of the
dinner, but he hadn't really enjoyed it because he was thinking all the time about Turkish Delight -
and there's nothing that spoils the taste of good ordinary food half so much as the memory of bad
magic food. And he had heard the conversation, and hadn't enjoyed it much either, because he kept
on thinking that the others were taking no notice of him and trying to give him the cold shoulder.
They weren't, but he imagined it. And then he had listened until Mr Beaver told them about Aslan
and until he had heard the whole arrangement for meeting Aslan at the Stone Table. It was then that
he began very quietly to edge himself under the curtain which hung over the door. For the mention of
Aslan gave him a mysterious and horrible feeling just as it gave the others a mysterious and lovely
feeling.
Just as Mr Beaver had been repeating the rhyme about Adam's flesh and Adam's bone Edmund had
been very quietly turning the doorhandle; and just before Mr Beaver had begun telling them that the
White Witch wasn't really human at all but half a Jinn and half a giantess, Edmund had got outside
into the snow and cautiously closed the door behind him.
You mustn't think that even now Edmund was quite so bad that he actually wanted his brother and
sisters to be turned into stone. He did want Turkish Delight and to be a Prince (and later a King) and
to pay Peter out for calling him a beast. As for what the Witch would do with the others, he didn't
want her to be particularly nice to them - certainly not to put them on the same level as himself; but
he managed to believe, or to pretend he believed, that she wouldn't do anything very bad to them,
"Because," he said to himself, "all these people who say nasty things about her are her enemies and
probably half of it isn't true. She was jolly nice to me, anyway, much nicer than they are. I expect she 
is the rightful Queen really. Anyway, she'll be better than that awful Aslan!" At least, that was the
excuse he made in his own mind for what he was doing. It wasn't a very good excuse, however, for
deep down inside him he really knew that the White Witch was bad and cruel.
The first thing he realised when he got outside and found the snow falling all round him, was that he
had left his coat behind in the Beavers' house. And of course there was no chance of going back to
get it now. The next thing he realised was that the daylight was almost gone, for it had been nearly
three o'clock when they sat down to dinner and the winter days were short. He hadn't reckoned on
this; but he had to make the best of it. So he turned up his collar and shuffled across the top of the
dam (luckily it wasn't so slippery since the snow had fallen) to the far side of the river.
It was pretty bad when he reached the far side. It was growing darker every minute and what with
that and the snowflakes swirling all round him he could hardly see three feet ahead. And then too
there was no road. He kept slipping into deep drifts of snow, and skidding on frozen puddles, and
tripping over fallen tree-trunks, and sliding down steep banks, and barking his shins against rocks, till
he was wet and cold and bruised all over. The silence and the loneliness were dreadful. In fact I really
think he might have given up the whole plan and gone back and owned up and made friends with the
others, if he hadn't happened to say to himself, "When I'm King of Narnia the first thing I shall do
will be to make some decent roads." And of course that set him off thinking about being a King and
all the other things he would do and this cheered him up a good deal. He had just settled in his mind
what sort of palace he would have and how many cars and all about his private cinema and where the
principal railways would run and what laws he would make against beavers and dams and was
putting the finishing touches to some schemes for keeping Peter in his place, when the weather
changed. First the snow stopped. Then a wind sprang up and it became freezing cold. Finally, the
clouds rolled away and the moon came out. It was a full moon and, shining on all that snow, it made
everything almost as bright as day - only the shadows were rather confusing.
He would never have found his way if the moon hadn't come out by the time he got to the other
river you remember he had seen (when they first arrived at the Beavers') a smaller river flowing into
the great one lower down. He now reached this and turned to follow it up. But the little valley down
which it came was much steeper and rockier than the one he had just left and much overgrown with
bushes, so that he could not have managed it at all in the dark. Even as it was, he got wet through for
he had to stoop under branches and great loads of snow came sliding off on to his back. And every
time this happened he thought more and more how he hated Peter - just as if all this had been Peter's
fault.
But at last he came to a part where it was more level and the valley opened out. And there, on the
other side of the river, quite close to him, in the middle of a little plain between two hills, he saw
what must be the White Witch's House. And the moon was shining brighter than ever. The House
was really a small castle. It seemed to be all towers; little towers with long pointed spires on them,
sharp as needles. They looked like huge dunce's caps or sorcerer's caps. And they shone in the
moonlight and their long shadows looked strange on the snow. Edmund began to be afraid of the 
House.
But it was too late to think of turning back now.
He crossed the river on the ice and walked up to the House. There was nothing stirring; not the
slightest sound anywhere. Even his own feet made no noise on the deep newly fallen snow. He
walked on and on, past corner after corner of the House, and past turret after turret to find the door.
He had to go right round to the far side before he found it. It was a huge arch but the great iron gates
stood wide open.
Edmund crept up to the arch and looked inside into the courtyard, and there he saw a sight that
nearly made his heart stop beating. Just inside the gate, with the moonlight shining on it, stood an
enormous lion crouched as if it was ready to spring. And Edmund stood in the shadow of the arch,
afraid to go on and afraid to go back, with his knees knocking together. He stood there so long that
his teeth would have been chattering with cold even if they had not been chattering with fear. How
long this really lasted I don't know, but it seemed to Edmund to last for hours.
Then at last he began to wonder why the lion was standing so still - for it hadn't moved one inch
since he first set eyes on it. Edmund now ventured a little nearer, still keeping in the shadow of the
arch as much as he could. He now saw from the way the lion was standing that it couldn't have been
looking at him at all. ("But supposing it turns its head?" thought Edmund.) In fact it was staring at
something else namely a little: dwarf who stood with his back to it about four feet away. "Aha!"
thought Edmund. "When it springs at the dwarf then will be my chance to escape." But still the lion
never moved, nor did the dwarf. And now at last Edmund remembered what the others had said about
the White Witch turning people into stone. Perhaps this was only a stone lion. And as soon as he had
thought of that he noticed that the lion's back and the top of its head were covered with snow. Of
course it must be only a statue! No living animal would have let itself get covered with snow. Then
very slowly and with his heart beating as if it would burst, Edmund ventured to go up to the lion.
Even now he hardly dared to touch it, but at last he put out his hand, very quickly, and did. It was
cold stone. He had been frightened of a mere statue!
 The relief which Edmund felt was so great that in spite of the cold he suddenly got warm all over
right down to his toes, and at the same time there came into his head what seemed a perfectly lovely
idea. "Probably," he thought, "this is the great Lion Aslan that they were all talking about. She's
caught him already and turned him into stone. So that's the end of all their fine ideas about him!
Pooh! Who's afraid of Aslan?"
 And he stood there gloating over the stone lion, and presently he did something very silly and 
childish. He took a stump of lead pencil out of his pocket and scribbled a moustache on the lion's
upper lip and then a pair of spectacles on its eyes. Then he said, "Yah! Silly old Aslan! How do you
like being a stone? You thought yourself mighty fine, didn't you?" But in spite of the scribbles on it
the face of the great stone beast still looked so terrible, and sad, and noble, staring up in the
moonlight, that Edmund didn't really get any fun out of jeering at it. He turned away and began to
cross the courtyard.
As he got into the middle of it he saw that there were dozens of statues all about - standing here and
there rather as the pieces stand on a chess-board when it is half-way through the game. There were
stone satyrs, and stone wolves, and bears and foxes and cat-amountains of stone. There were lovely
stone shapes that looked like women but who were really the spirits of trees. There was the great
shape of a centaur and a winged horse and a long lithe creature that Edmund took to be a dragon.
They all looked so strange standing there perfectly life-like and also perfectly still, in the bright cold
moonlight, that it was eerie work crossing the courtyard. Right in the very middle stood a huge shape
like a man, but as tall as a tree, with a fierce face and a shaggy beard and a great club in its right
hand. Even though he knew that it was only a stone giant and not a live one, Edmund did not like
going past it.
He now saw that there was a dim light showing from a doorway on the far side of the courtyard. He
went to it; there was a flight of stone steps going up to an open door. Edmund went up them. Across
the threshold lay a great wolf.
"It's all right, it's all right," he kept saying to himself; "it's only a stone wolf. It can't hurt me", and he
raised his leg to step over it. Instantly the huge creature rose, with all the hair bristling along its back,
opened a great, red mouth and said in a growling voice:
 "Who's there? Who's there? Stand still, stranger, and tell me who you are."
 "If you please, sir," said Edmund, trembling so that he could hardly speak, "my name is Edmund,
and I'm the Son of Adam that Her Majesty met in the wood the other day and I've come to bring her
the news that my brother and sisters are now in Narnia - quite close, in the Beavers' house. She - she
wanted to see them."
 "I will tell Her Majesty," said the Wolf. "Meanwhile, stand still on the threshold, as you value your
life." Then it vanished into the house.
Edmund stood and waited, his fingers aching with cold and his heart pounding in his chest, and
presently the grey wolf, Maugrim, the Chief of the Witch's Secret Police, came bounding back and
said, "Come in! Come in! Fortunate favourite of the Queen - or else not so fortunate."
 And Edmund went in, taking great care not to tread on the Wolf's paws.
He found himself in a long gloomy hall with many pillars, full, as the courtyard had been, of statues.
The one nearest the door was a little faun with a very sad expression on its face, and Edmund couldn't
help wondering if this might be Lucy's friend. The only light came from a single lamp and close
beside this sat the White Witch.
"I'm come, your Majesty," said Edmund, rushing eagerly forward.
"How dare you come alone?" said the Witch in a terrible voice. "Did I not tell you to bring the
others with you?"
 "Please, your Majesty," said Edmund, "I've done the best I can. I've brought them quite close.
They're in the little house on top of the dam just up the riverwith Mr and Mrs Beaver."
 A slow cruel smile came over the Witch's face.
"Is this all your news?" she asked.
"No, your Majesty," said Edmund, and proceeded to tell her all he had heard before leaving the
Beavers' house.
"What! Aslan?" cried the Queen, "Aslan! Is this true? If I find you have lied to me -"
 "Please, I'm only repeating what they said," stammered Edmund.
But the Queen, who was no longer attending to him, clapped her hands. Instantly the same dwarf
whom Edmund had seen with her before appeared.
"Make ready our sledge," ordered the Witch, "and use the harness without bells."
Now we must go back to Mr and Mrs Beaver and the three other children. As soon as Mr Beaver
said, "There's no time to lose," everyone began bundling themselves into coats, except Mrs Beaver,
who started picking up sacks and laying them on the table and said: "Now, Mr Beaver, just reach
down that ham. And here's a packet of tea, and there's sugar, and some matches. And if someone will
get two or three loaves out of the crock over there in the corner."
 "What are you doing, Mrs Beaver?" exclaimed Susan.
"Packing a load for each of us, dearie," said Mrs Beaver very coolly. "You didn't think we'd set out
on a journey with nothing to eat, did you?"
 "But we haven't time!" said Susan, buttoning the collar of her coat. "She may be here any minute."
 "That's what I say," chimed in Mr Beaver.
"Get along with you all," said his wife. "Think it over, Mr Beaver. She can't be here for quarter of an
hour at least."
 "But don't we want as big a start as we can possibly get," said Peter, "if we're to reach the Stone
Table before her?"
 "You've got to remember that, Mrs Beaver," said Susan. "As soon as she has looked in here and finds
we're gone she'll be off at top speed."
 "That she will," said Mrs Beaver. "But we can't get there before her whatever we do, for she'll be on
a sledge and we'll be walking."
 "Then - have we no hope?" said Susan.
"Now don't you get fussing, there's a dear," said Mrs Beaver, "but just get half a dozen clean
handkerchiefs out of the drawer. 'Course we've got a hope. We can't get there before her but we can
keep under cover and go by ways she won't expect and perhaps we'll get through."
 "That's true enough, Mrs Beaver," said her husband. "But it's time we were out of this."
 "And don't you start fussing either, Mr Beaver," said his wife. "There. That's better. There's five
loads and the smallest for the smallest of us: that's you, my dear," she added, looking at Lucy.
"Oh, do please come on," said Lucy.
"Well, I'm nearly ready now," answered Mrs Beaver at last, allowing her husband to help her into;
her snow-boots. "I suppose the sewing machine's took heavy to bring?"
 "Yes. It is," said Mr Beaver. "A great deal too heavy. And you don't think you'll be able to use it
while we're on the run, I suppose?"
 "I can't abide the thought of that Witch fiddling with it," said Mrs Beaver, "and breaking it or
stealing it, as likely as not."
 "Oh, please, please, please, do hurry!" said the three children. And so at last they all got outside and
Mr Beaver locked the door ("It'll delay her a bit," he said) and they set off, all carrying their loads
over their shoulders.
The snow had stopped and the moon had come out when they began their journey. They went in
single file - first Mr Beaver, then Lucy, then Peter, then Susan, and Mrs Beaver last of all. Mr Beaver
led them across the dam and on to the right bank of the river and then along a very rough sort of path
among the trees right down by the river-bank. The sides of the valley, shining in the moonlight,
towered up far above them on either hand. "Best keep down here as much as possible," he said.
"She'll have to keep to the top, for you couldn't bring a sledge down here."
 It would have been a pretty enough scene to look at it through a window from a comfortable
armchair; and even as things were, Lucy enjoyed it at first. But as they went on walking and walking
- and walking and as the sack she was carrying felt heavier and heavier, she began to wonder how she
was going to keep up at all. And she stopped looking at the dazzling brightness of the frozen river
with all its waterfalls of ice and at the white masses of the tree-tops and the great glaring moon and
the countless stars and could only watch the little short legs of Mr Beaver going pad-pad-pad-pad
through the snow in front of her as if they were never going to stop. Then the moon disappeared and
the snow began to fall once more. And at last Lucy was so tired that she was almost asleep and
walking at the same time when suddenly she found that Mr Beaver had turned away from the riverbank
to the right and was leading them steeply uphill into the very thickest bushes. And then as she
came fully awake she found that Mr Beaver was just vanishing into a little hole in the bank which had
been almost hidden under the bushes until you were quite on top of it. In fact, by the time she realised
what was happening, only his short flat tail was showing.
Lucy immediately stooped down and crawled in after him. Then she heard noises of scrambling and
puffing and panting behind her and in a moment all five of them were inside.
"Wherever is this?" said Peter's voice, sounding tired and pale in the darkness. (I hope you know
what I mean by a voice sounding pale.)
 "It's an old hiding-place for beavers in bad times," said Mr Beaver, "and a great secret. It's not much
of a place but we must get a few hours' sleep."
 "If you hadn't all been in such a plaguey fuss when we were starting, I'd have brought some pillows," 
said Mrs Beaver.
It wasn't nearly such a nice cave as Mr Tumnus's, Lucy thought - just a hole in the ground but dry
and earthy. It was very small so that when they all lay down they were all a bundle of clothes
together, and what with that and being warmed up by their long walk they were really rather snug. If
only the floor of the cave had been a little smoother! Then Mrs Beaver handed round in the dark a
little flask out of which everyone drank something - it made one cough and splutter a little and stung
the throat, but it also made you feel deliciously warm after you'd swallowed it and everyone went
straight to sleep.
It seemed to Lucy only the next minute (though really it was hours and hours later) when she woke
up feeling a little cold and dreadfully stiff and thinking how she would like a hot bath. Then she felt a
set of long whiskers tickling her cheek and saw the cold daylight coming in through the mouth of the
cave. But immediately after that she was very wide awake indeed, and so was everyone else. In fact
they were all sitting up with their mouths and eyes wide open listening to a sound which was the very
sound they'd all been thinking of (and sometimes imagining they heard) during their walk last night.
It was a sound of jingling bells.
Mr Beaver was out of the cave like a flash the moment he heard it. Perhaps you think, as Lucy
thought for a moment, that this was a very silly thing to do? But it was really a very sensible one. He
knew he could scramble to the top of the bank among bushes and brambles without being seen; and
he wanted above all things to see which way the Witch's sledge went. The others all sat in the cave
waiting and wondering. They waited nearly five minutes. Then they heard something that frightened
them very much. They heard voices. "Oh," thought Lucy, "he's been seen. She's caught him!"
 Great was their surprise when a little later, they heard Mr Beaver's voice calling to them from just
outside the cave.
"It's all right," he was shouting. "Come out, Mrs Beaver. Come out, Sons and Daughters of Adam.
It's all right! It isn't Her!" This was bad grammar of course, but that is how beavers talk when they are
excited; I mean, in Narnia - in our world they usually don't talk at all.
So Mrs Beaver and the children came bundling out of the cave, all blinking in the daylight, and with
earth all over them, and looking very frowsty and unbrushed and uncombed and with the sleep in
their eyes.
"Come on!" cried Mr Beaver, who was almost dancing with delight. "Come and see! This is a nasty
knock for the Witch! It looks as if her power is already crumbling."
 "What do you mean, Mr Beaver?" panted Peter as they all scrambled up the steep bank of the valley
together.
"Didn't I tell you," answered Mr Beaver, "that she'd made it always winter and never Christmas?
Didn't I tell you? Well, just come and see!"
 And then they were all at the top and did see.
It was a sledge, and it was reindeer with bells on their harness. But they were far bigger than the
Witch's reindeer, and they were not white but brown. And on the sledge sat a person whom everyone
knew the moment they set eyes on him. He was a huge man. in a bright red robe (bright as
hollyberries) with a hood that had fur inside it and a great white beard, that fell like a foamy waterfall
over his chest.
Everyone knew him because, though you see people of his sort only in Narnia, you see pictures of
them and hear them talked about even in our world - the world on this side of the wardrobe door. But
when you really see them in Narnia it is rather different. Some of the pictures of Father Christmas in
our world make him look only funny and jolly. But now that the children actually stood looking at
him they didn't find it quite like that. He was so big, and so glad, and so real, that they all became
quite still. They felt very glad, but also solemn.
"I've come at last," said he. "She has kept me out for a long time, but I have got in at last. Aslan is
on the move. The Witch's magic is weakening."
 And Lucy felt running through her that deep shiver of gladness which you only get if you are being
solemn and still.
"And now," said Father Christmas, "for your presents. There is a new and better sewing machine for
you, Mrs Beaver. I will drop it in your house as, I pass."
 "If you please, sir," said Mrs Beaver, making a curtsey. "It's locked up."
 "Locks and bolts make no difference to me," said Father Christmas. "And as for you, Mr Beaver,
when you get home you will find your dam finished and mended and all the leaks stopped and a new
sluicegate fitted."
 Mr Beaver was so pleased that he opened his mouth very wide and then found he couldn't say
anything at all.
"Peter, Adam's Son," said Father Christmas.
"Here, sir," said Peter.
"These are your presents," was the answer, "and they are tools not toys. The time to use them is
perhaps near at hand. Bear them well." With these words he handed to Peter a shield and a sword.
The shield was the colour of silver and across it there ramped a red lion, as bright as a ripe strawberry
at the moment when you pick it. The hilt of the sword was of gold and it had a sheath and a sword
belt and everything it needed, and it was just the right size and weight for Peter to use. Peter was
silent and solemn as he received these gifts, for he felt they were a very serious kind of present.
"Susan, Eve's Daughter," said Father Christmas. "These are for you," and he handed her a bow and a
quiver full of arrows and a little ivory horn. "You must use the bow only in great need," he said, "for
I do not mean you to fight in the battle. It does not easily miss. And when you put this horn to your
lips; and blow it, then, wherever you are, I think help of some kind will come to you."
 Last of all he said, "Lucy, Eve's Daughter," and Lucy came forward. He gave her a little bottle of
what looked like glass (but people said afterwards that it was made of diamond) and a small dagger.
"In this bottle," he said, "there is cordial made of the juice of one of the fireflowers that grow in the
mountains of the sun. If you or any of your friends is hurt, a few drops of this restore them. And the
dagger is to defend yourse at great need. For you also are not to be in battle."
 "Why, sir?" said Lucy. "I think - I don't know but I think I could be brave enough."
 "That is not the point," he said. "But battles are ugly when women fight. And now" - here he
suddenly looked less grave - "here is something for the moment for you all!" and he brought out (I
suppose from the big bag at his back, but nobody quite saw him do it) a large tray containing five
cups and saucers, a bowl of lump sugar, a jug of cream, and a great big teapot all sizzling and piping
hot. Then he cried out "Merry Christmas! Long live the true King!" and cracked his whip, and he and
the reindeer and the sledge and all were out of sight before anyone realised that they had started.
Peter had just drawn his sword out of its sheath and was showing it to Mr Beaver, when Mrs Beaver
said:
 "Now then, now then! Don't stand talking there till the tea's got cold. Just like men. Come and help
to carry the tray down and we'll have breakfast. What a mercy I thought of bringing the bread-knife."
 So down the steep bank they went and back to the cave, and Mr Beaver cut some of the bread and
ham into sandwiches and Mrs Beaver poured out the tea and everyone enjoyed themselves. But long
before they had finished enjoying themselves Mr Beaver said, "Time to be moving on now."
 EDMUND meanwhile had been having a most disappointing time. When the dwarf had gone to get
the sledge ready he expected that the Witch would start being nice to him, as she had been at their last
meeting. But she said nothing at all. And when at last Edmund plucked up his courage to say,
"Please, your Majesty, could I have some Turkish Delight? You - you - said -" she answered,
"Silence, fool!" Then she appeared to change her mind and said, as if to herself, a "And yet it will not
do to have the brat fainting on the way," and once more clapped her hands. Another, dwarf appeared.
"Bring the human creature food and drink," she said.
The dwarf went away and presently returned bringing an iron bowl with some water in it and an iron 
plate with a hunk of dry bread on it. He grinned in a repulsive manner as he set them down on the
floor beside Edmund and said:
 "Turkish Delight for the little Prince. Ha! Ha! Ha!"
 "Take it away," said Edmund sulkily. "I don't want dry bread." But the Witch suddenly turned on
him with such a terrible expression on her face that he, apologised and began to nibble at the bread,
though, it was so stale he could hardly get it down.
"You may be glad enough of it before you taste bread again," said the Witch.
While he was still chewing away the first dwarf came back and announced that the sledge was
ready. The White Witch rose and went out, ordering Edmund to go with her. The snow was again
falling as they came into the courtyard, but she took no notice of that and made Edmund sit beside
her on the sledge. But before they drove off she called Maugrim and he came bounding like an
enormous dog to the side of the sledge.
"Take with you the swiftest of your wolves and go at once to the house of the Beavers," said the
Witch, "and kill whatever you find there. If they are already gone, then make all speed to the Stone
Table, but do not be seen. Wait for me there in hiding. I meanwhile must go many miles to the West
before I find a place where I can drive across the river. You may overtake these humans before they
reach the Stone Table. You will know what to do if you find them!"
 "I hear and obey, O Queen," growled the Wolf, and immediately he shot away into the snow and
darkness, as quickly as a horse can gallop. In a few minutes he had called another wolf and was with
him down on the dam sniffing at the Beavers' house. But of course they found it empty. It would have
been a dreadful thing for the Beavers and the children if the night had remained fine, for the wolves
would then have been able to follow their trail - and ten to one would have overtaken them before
they had got to the cave. But now that the snow had begun again the scent was cold and even the
footprints were covered up.
Meanwhile the dwarf whipped up the reindeer, and the Witch and Edmund drove out under the
archway and on and away into the darkness and the cold. This was a terrible journey for Edmund,
who had no coat. Before they had been going quarter of an hour all the front of him was covered with
snow - he soon stopped trying to shake it off because, as quickly as he did that, a new lot gathered,
and he was so tired. Soon he was wet to the skin. And oh, how miserable he was! It didn't look now 
as if the Witch intended to make him a King. All the things he had said to make himself believe that
she was good and kind and that her side was really the right side sounded to him silly now. He would
have given anything to meet the others at this moment - even Peter! The only way to comfort himself
now was to try to believe that the whole thing was a dream and that he might wake up at any
moment. And as they went on, hour after hour, it did come to seem like a dream.
This lasted longer than I could describe even if I wrote pages and pages about it. But I will skip on
to the time when the snow had stopped and the morning had come and they were racing along in the
daylight. And still they went on and on, with no sound but the everlasting swish of the snow and the
creaking of the reindeer's harness. And then at last the Witch said, "What have we here? Stop!" and
they did.
How Edmund hoped she was going to say something about breakfast! But she had stopped for quite
a different reason. A little way off at the foot of a tree sat a merry party, a squirrel and his wife with
their children and two satyrs and a dwarf and an old dogfox, all on stools round a table. Edmund
couldn't quite see what they were eating, but it smelled lovely and there seemed to be decorations of
holly and he wasn't at all sure that he didn't see something like a plum pudding. At the moment when
the sledge stopped, the Fox, who was obviously the oldest person present, had just risen to its feet,
holding a glass in its right paw as if it was going to say something. But when the whole party saw the
sledge stopping and who was in it, all the gaiety went out of their faces. The father squirrel stopped
eating with his fork half-way to his mouth and one of the satyrs stopped with its fork actually in its
mouth, and the baby squirrels squeaked with terror.
"What is the meaning of this?" asked the Witch Queen. Nobody answered.
"Speak, vermin!" she said again. "Or do you want my dwarf to find you a tongue with his whip?
What is the meaning of all this gluttony, this waste, this selfindulgence? Where did you get all these
things?"
 "Please, your Majesty," said the Fox, "we were given them. And if I might make so bold as to drink
your Majesty's very good health - "
 "Who gave them to you?" said the Witch.
"F-F-F-Father Christmas," stammered the Fox.
"What?" roared the Witch, springing from the sledge and taking a few strides nearer to the terrified
animals. "He has not been here! He cannot have been here! How dare you - but no. Say you have
been lying and you shall even now be forgiven."
 At that moment one of the young squirrels lost its head completely.
"He has - he has - he has!" it squeaked, beating its little spoon on the table. Edmund saw the Witch
bite her lips so that a drop of blood appeared on her white cheek. Then she raised her wand. "Oh,
don't, don't, please don't," shouted Edmund, but even while he was shouting she had waved her wand
and instantly where the merry party had been there were only statues of creatures (one with its stone
fork fixed forever half-way to its stone mouth) seated round a stone table on which there were stone
plates and a stone plum pudding.
"As for you," said the Witch, giving Edmund a stunning blow on the face as she re-mounted the
sledge, "let that teach you to ask favour for spies and traitors. Drive on!" And Edmund for the first
time in this story felt sorry for someone besides himself. It seemed so pitiful to think of those little
stone figures sitting there all the silent days and all the dark nights, year after year, till the moss grew
on them and at last even their faces crumbled away.
Now they were steadily racing on again. And soon Edmund noticed that the snow which splashed
against them as they rushed through it was much wetter than it had been all last night. At the same
time he noticed that he was feeling much less cold. It was also becoming foggy. In fact every minute
it grew foggier and warmer. And the sledge was not running nearly as well as it had been running up
till now. At first he thought this was because the reindeer were tired, but soon he saw that that
couldn't be the real reason. The sledge jerked, and skidded and kept on jolting as if it had struck
against stones. And however the dwarf whipped the poor reindeer the sledge went slower and slower.
There also seemed to be a curious noise all round them, but the noise of their driving and jolting and
the dwarf's shouting at the reindeer prevented Edmund from hearing what it was, until suddenly the
sledge stuck so fast that it wouldn't go on at all. When that happened there was a moment's silence.
And in that silence Edmund could at last listen to the other noise properly. A strange, sweet, rustling,
chattering noise - and yet not so strange, for he'd heard it before - if only he could remember where!
Then all at once he did remember. It was the noise of running water. All round them though out of
sight, there were streams, chattering, murmuring, bubbling, splashing and even (in the distance)
roaring. And his heart gave a great leap (though he hardly knew why) when he realised that the frost
was over. And much nearer there was a drip-drip-drip from the branches of all the trees. And then, as
he looked at one tree he saw a great load of snow slide off it and for the first time since he had
entered Narnia he saw the dark green of a fir tree. But he hadn't time to listen or watch any longer, for
the Witch said:
 "Don't sit staring, fool! Get out and help."
 And of course Edmund had to obey. He stepped out into the snow - but it was really only slush by
now - and began helping the dwarf to get the sledge out of the muddy hole it had got into. They got it
out in the end, and by being very cruel to the reindeer the dwarf managed to get it on the move again,
and they drove a little further. And now the snow was really melting in earnest and patches of green
grass were beginning to appear in every direction. Unless you have looked at a world of snow as long
as Edmund had been looking at it, you will hardly be able to imagine what a relief those green
patches were after the endless white. Then the sledge stopped again.
"It's no good, your Majesty," said the dwarf. "We can't sledge in this thaw."
 "Then we must walk," said the Witch.
"We shall never overtake them walking," growled the dwarf. "Not with the start they've got."
 "Are you my councillor or my slave?" said the Witch. "Do as you're told. Tie the hands of the human
creature behind it and keep hold of the end of the rope. And take your whip. And cut the harness of
the reindeer; they'll find their own way home."
 The dwarf obeyed, and in a few minutes Edmund found himself being forced to walk as fast as he
could with his hands tied behind him. He kept on slipping in the slush and mud and wet grass, and
every time he slipped the dwarf gave him a curse and sometimes a flick with the whip. The Witch
walked behind the dwarf and kept on saying, "Faster! Faster!"
 Every moment the patches of green grew bigger and the patches of spow grew smaller. Every
moment more and more of the trees shook off their robes of snow. Soon, wherever you looked,
instead of white shapes you saw the dark green of firs or the black prickly branches of bare oaks and
beeches and elms. Then the mist turned from white to gold and presently cleared away altogether.
Shafts of delicious sunlight struck down on to the forest floor and overhead you could see a blue sky
between the tree tops.
Soon there were more wonderful things happening. Coming suddenly round a corner into a glade of 
silver birch trees Edmund saw the ground covered in all directions with little yellow flowers -
celandines. The noise of water grew louder. Presently they actually crossed a stream. Beyond it they
found snowdrops growing.
"Mind your own business!" said the dwarf when he saw that Edmund had turned his head to look at
them; and he gave the rope a vicious jerk.
But of course this didn't prevent Edmund from seeing. Only five minutes later he noticed a dozen
crocuses growing round the foot of an old tree - gold and purple and white. Then came a sound even
more delicious than the sound of the water. Close beside the path they were following a bird suddenly
chirped from the branch of a tree. It was answered by the chuckle of another bird a little further off.
And then, as if that had been a signal, there was chattering and chirruping in every direction, and then
a moment of full song, and within five minutes the whole wood was ringing with birds' music, and
wherever Edmund's eyes turned he saw birds alighting on branches, or sailing overhead or chasing
one another or having their little quarrels or tidying up their feathers with their beaks.
"Faster! Faster!" said the Witch.
There was no trace of the fog now. The sky became bluer and bluer, and now there were white
clouds hurrying across it from time to time. In the wide glades there were primroses. A light breeze
sprang up which scattered drops of moisture from the swaying branches and carried cool, delicious
scents against the faces of the travellers. The trees began to come fully alive. The larches and birches
were covered with green, the laburnums with gold. Soon the beech trees had put forth their delicate,
transparent leaves. As the travellers walked under them the light also became green. A bee buzzed
across their path.
"This is no thaw," said the dwarf, suddenly stopping. "This is Spring. What are we to do? Your
winter has been destroyed, I tell you! This is Aslan's doing."
 "If either of you mention that name again," said the Witch, "he shall instantly be killed."
 WHILE the dwarf and the White Witch were saying this, miles away the Beavers and the children
were walking on hour after hour into what seemed a delicious dream. Long ago they had left the coats
behind them. And by now they had even stopped saying to one another, "Look! there's a kingfisher,"
or "I say, bluebells!" or "What was that lovely smell?" or "Just listen to that thrush!" They walked on
in silence drinking it all in, passing through patches of warm sunlight into cool, green thickets and out
again into wide mossy glades where tall elms raised the leafy roof far overhead, and then into dense
masses of flowering currant and among hawthorn bushes where the sweet smell was almost
overpowering.
They had been just as surprised as Edmund when they saw the winter vanishing and the whole wood
passing in a few hours or so from January to May. They hadn't even known for certain (as the Witch
did) that this was what would happen when Aslan came to Narnia. But they all knew that it was her
spells which had produced the endless winter; and therefore they all knew when this magic spring
began that something had gone wrong, and badly wrong, with the Witch's schemes. And after the
thaw had been going on for some time they all realised that the Witch would no longer be able to use
her sledge. After that they didn't hurry so much and they allowed themselves more rests and longer
ones. They were pretty tired by now of course; but not what I'd call bitterly tired - only slow and
feeling very dreamy and quiet inside as one does when one is coming to the end of a long day in the
open. Susan had a slight blister on one heel.
They had left the course of the big river some time ago; for one had to turn a little to the right (that
meant a little to the south) to reach the place of the Stone Table. Even if this had not been their way
they couldn't have kept to the river valley once the thaw began, for with all that melting snow the
river was soon in flood - a wonderful, roaring, thundering yellow flood - and their path would have
been under water.
And now the sun got low and the light got redder and the shadows got longer and the flowers began
to think about closing.
"Not long now," said Mr Beaver, and began leading them uphill across some very deep, springy
moss (it felt nice under their tired feet) in a place where only tall trees grew, very wide apart. The
climb, coming at the end of the long day, made them all pant and blow. And just as Lucy was
wondering whether she could really get to the top without another long rest, suddenly they were at
the top. And this is what they saw.
They were on a green open space from which you could look down on the forest spreading as far as 
one could see in every direction - except right ahead. There, far to the East, was something twinkling
and moving. "By gum!" whispered Peter to Susan, "the sea!" In the very middle of this open hill-top
was the Stone Table. It was a great grim slab of grey stone supported on four upright stones. It looked
very old; and it was cut all over with strange lines and figures that might be the letters of an unknown
language. They gave you a curious feeling when you looked at them. The next thing they saw was a
pavilion pitched on one side of the open place. A wonderful pavilion it was - and especially now
when the light of the setting sun fell upon it - with sides of what looked like yellow silk and cords of
crimson and tent-pegs of ivory; and high above it on a pole a banner which bore a red rampant lion
fluttering in the breeze which was blowing in their faces from the far-off sea. While they were
looking at this they heard a sound of music on their right; and turning in that direction they saw what
they had come to see.
Aslan stood in the centre of a crowd of creatures who had grouped themselves round him in the
shape of a half-moon. There were Tree-Women there and Well-Women (Dryads and Naiads as they
used to be called in our world) who had stringed instruments; it was they who had made the music.
There were four great centaurs. The horse part of them was like huge English farm horses, and the
man part was like stern but beautiful giants. There was also a unicorn, and a bull with the head of a
man, and a pelican, and an eagle, and a great Dog. And next to Aslan stood two leopards of whom
one carried his crown and the other his standard.
But as for Aslan himself, the Beavers and the children didn't know what to do or say when they saw
him. People who have not been in Narnia sometimes think that a thing cannot be good and terrible at
the same time. If the children had ever thought so, they were cured of it now. For when they tried to
look at Aslan's face they just caught a glimpse of the golden mane and the great, royal, solemn,
overwhelming eyes; and then they found they couldn't look at him and went all trembly.
"Go on," whispered Mr Beaver.
"No," whispered Peter, "you first."
 "No, Sons of Adam before animals," whispered Mr Beaver back again.
"Susan," whispered Peter, "What about you? Ladies first."
 "No, you're the eldest," whispered Susan. And of course the longer they went on doing this the more
awkward they felt. Then at last Peter realised that it was up to him. He drew his sword and raised it to 
the salute and hastily saying to the others "Come on. Pull yourselves together," he advanced to the
Lion and said:
 "We have come - Aslan."
 "Welcome, Peter, Son of Adam," said Aslan. "Welcome, Susan and Lucy, Daughters of Eve.
Welcome He-Beaver and She-Beaver."
 His voice was deep and rich and somehow took the fidgets out of them. They now felt glad and quiet
and it didn't seem awkward to them to stand and say nothing.
"But where is the fourth?" asked Aslan.
"He has tried to betray them and joined the White Witch, O Aslan," said Mr Beaver. And then
something made Peter say,
 "That was partly my fault, Aslan. I was angry with him and I think that helped him to go wrong."
 And Aslan said nothing either to excuse Peter or to blame him but merely stood looking at him with
his great unchanging eyes. And it seemed to all of them that there was nothing to be said.
"Please - Aslan," said Lucy, "can anything be done to save Edmund?"
 "All shall be done," said Aslan. "But it may be harder than you think." And then he was silent again
for some time. Up to that moment Lucy had been thinking how royal and strong and peaceful his face
looked; now it suddenly came into her head that he looked sad as well. But next minute that
expression was quite gone. The Lion shook his mane and clapped his paws together ("Terrible paws,"
thought Lucy, "if he didn't know how to velvet them!") and said,
 "Meanwhile, let the feast be prepared. Ladies, take these Daughters of Eve to the pavilion and 
minister to them."
 When the girls had gone Aslan laid his paw - and though it was velveted it was very heavy - on
Peter's shoulder and said, "Come, Son of Adam, and I will show you a far-off sight of the castle
where you are to be King."
 And Peter with his sword still drawn in his hand went with the Lion to the eastern edge of the hilltop.
There a beautiful sight met their eyes. The sun was setting behind their backs. That meant that the
whole country below them lay in the evening light - forest and hills and valleys and, winding away
like a silver snake, the lower part of the great river. And beyond all this, miles away, was the sea, and
beyond the sea the sky, full of clouds which were just turning rose colour with the reflection of the
sunset. But just where the land of Narnia met the sea - in fact, at the mouth of the great river - there
was something on a little hill, shining. It was shining because it was a castle and of course the
sunlight was reflected from all the windows which looked towards Peter and the sunset; but to Peter it
looked like a great star resting on the seashore.
"That, O Man," said Aslan, "is Cair Paravel of the four thrones, in one of which you must sit as
King. I show it to you because you are the first-born and you will be High King over all the rest."
 And once more Peter said nothing, for at that moment a strange noise woke the silence suddenly. It
was like a bugle, but richer.
"It is your sister's horn," said Aslan to Peter in a low voice; so low as to be almost a purr, if it is not
disrespectful to think of a Lion purring.
For a moment Peter did not understand. Then, when he saw all the other creatures start forward and
heard Aslan say with a wave of his paw, "Back! Let the Prince win his spurs," he did understand, and
set off running as hard as he could to the pavilion. And there he saw a dreadful sight.
The Naiads and Dryads were scattering in every direction. Lucy was running towards him as fast as
her short legs would carry her and her face was as white as paper. Then he saw Susan make a dash
for a tree, and swing herself up, followed by a huge grey beast. At first Peter thought it was a bear.
Then he saw that it looked like an Alsatian, though it was far too big to be a dog. Then he realised
that it was a wolf - a wolf standing on its hind legs, with its front paws against the tree-trunk,
snapping and snarling. All the hair on its back stood up on end. Susan had not been able to get higher
than the second big branch. One of her legs hung down so that her foot was only an inch or two 
above the snapping teeth. Peter wondered why she did not get higher or at least take a better grip;
then he realised that she was just going to faint and that if she fainted she would fall off.
Peter did not feel very brave; indeed, he felt he was going to be sick. But that made no difference to
what he had to do. He rushed straight up to the monster and aimed a slash of his sword at its side.
That stroke never reached the Wolf. Quick as lightning it turned round, its eyes flaming, and its
mouth wide open in a howl of anger. If it had not been so angry that it simply had to howl it would
have got him by the throat at once. As it was - though all this happened too quickly for Peter to think
at all - he had just time to duck down and plunge his sword, as hard as he could, between the brute's
forelegs into its heart. Then came a horrible, confused moment like something in a nightmare. He was
tugging and pulling and the Wolf seemed neither alive nor dead, and its bared teeth knocked against
his forehead, and everything was blood and heat and hair. A moment later he found that the monster
lay dead and he had drawn his sword out of it and was straightening his back and rubbing the sweat
off his face and out of his eyes. He felt tired all over.
Then, after a bit, Susan came down the tree. She and Peter felt pretty shaky when they met and I
won't say there wasn't kissing and crying on both sides. But in Narnia no one thinks any the worse of
you for that.
"Quick! Quick!" shouted the voice of Aslan. "Centaurs! Eagles! I see another wolf in the thickets.
There - behind you. He has just darted away. After him, all of you. He will be going to his mistress.
Now is your chance to find the Witch and rescue the fourth Son of Adam." And instantly with a
thunder of hoofs and beating of wings a dozen or so of the swiftest creatures disappeared into the
gathering darkness.
Peter, still out of breath, turned and saw Aslan close at hand.
"You have forgotten to clean your sword," said Aslan.
It was true. Peter blushed when he looked at the bright blade and saw it all smeared with the Wolf's
hair and blood. He stooped down and wiped it quite clean on the grass, and then wiped it quite dry on
his coat.
"Hand it to me and kneel, Son of Adam," said Aslan. And when Peter had done so he struck him
with the flat of the blade and said, "Rise up, Sir Peter Wolf's-Bane. And, whatever happens, never
forget to wipe your sword."
 Now we must get back to Edmund. When he had been made to walk far further than he had ever
known that anybody could walk, the Witch at last halted in a dark valley all overshadowed with fir
trees and yew trees. Edmund simply sank down and lay on his face doing nothing at all and not even
caring what was going to happen next provided they would let him lie still. He was too tired even to
notice how hungry and thirsty he was. The Witch and the dwarf were talking close beside him in low
tones.
"No," said the dwarf, "it is no use now, O Queen. They must have reached the Stone Table by now."
 "Perhaps the Wolf will smell us out and bring us news," said the Witch.
"It cannot be good news if he does," said the dwarf.
"Four thrones in Cair Paravel," said the Witch. "How if only three were filled? That would not fulfil
the prophecy."
 "What difference would that make now that He is here?" said the dwarf. He did not dare, even now,
to mention the name of Aslan to his mistress.
"He may not stay long. And then - we would fall upon the three at Cair."
 "Yet it might be better," said the dwarf, "to keep this one" (here he kicked Edmund) "for bargaining
with."
 "Yes! and have him rescued," said the Witch scornfully.
"Then," said the dwarf, "we had better do what we have to do at once."
 "I would like to have it done on the Stone Table itself," said the Witch. "That is the proper place.
That is where it has always been done before."
 "It will be a long time now before the Stone Table can again be put to its proper use," said the dwarf.
"True," said the Witch; and then, "Well, I will begin."
 At that moment with a rush and a snarl a Wolf rushed up to them.
"I have seen them. They are all at the Stone Table, with Him. They have killed my captain,
Maugrim. I was hidden in the thickets and saw it all. One of the Sons of Adam killed him. Fly! Fly!"
 "No," said the Witch. "There need be no flying. Go quickly. Summon all our people to meet me here
as speedily as they can. Call out the giants and the werewolves and the spirits of those trees who are
on our side. Call the Ghouls, and the Boggles, the Ogres and the Minotaurs. Call the Cruels, the
Hags, the Spectres, and the people of the Toadstools. We will fight. What? Have I not still my wand?
Will not their ranks turn into stone even as they come on? Be off quickly, I have a little thing to finish
here while you are away."
 The great brute bowed its head, turned, and galloped away.
"Now!" she said, "we have no table - let me see. We had better put it against the trunk of a tree."
 Edmund found himself being roughly forced to his feet. Then the dwarf set him with his back against 
a tree and bound him fast. He saw the Witch take off her outer mantle. Her arms were bare
underneath it and terribly white. Because they were so very white he could see them, but he could not
see much else, it was so dark in this valley under the dark trees.
"Prepare the victim,", said the Witch. And the dwarf undid Edmund's collar and folded back his shirt
at the neck. Then he took Edmund's hair and pulled his head back so that he had to raise his chin.
After that Edmund heard a strange noise - whizz whizz - whizz. For a moment he couldn't think what
it was. Then he realised. It was the sound of a knife being sharpened.
At that very moment he heard loud shouts from every direction - a drumming of hoofs and a beating
of wings - a scream from the Witch - confusion all round him. And then he found he was being
untied. Strong arms were round him and he heard big, kind voices saying things like -
 "Let him lie down - give him some wine - drink this - steady now - you'll be all right in a minute."
 Then he heard the voices of people who were not talking to him but to one another. And they were
saying things like "Who's got the Witch?" "I thought you had her." "I didn't see her after I knocked
the knife out of her hand - I was after the dwarf - do you mean to say she's escaped?" "- A chap can't
mind everything at once - what's that? Oh, sorry, it's only an old stump!" But just at this point
Edmund went off in a dead faint.
Presently the centaurs and unicorns and deer and birds (they were of course the rescue party which
Aslan had sent in the last chapter) all set off to go back to the Stone Table, carrying Edmund with
them. But if they could have seen what happened in that valley after they had gone, I think they might
have been surprised.
It was perfectly still and presently the moon grew bright; if you had been there you would have seen
the moonlight shining on an old tree-stump and on a fairsised boulder. But if you had gone on
looking you would gradually have begun to think there was something odd about both the stump and
the boulder. And next you would have thought that the stump did look really remarkably like a little
fat man crouching on the ground. And if you had watched long enough you would have seen the
stump walk across to the boulder and the boulder sit up and begin talking to the stump; for in reality
the stump and the boulder were simply the Witch and the dwarf. For it was part of her magic that she
could make things look like what they aren't, and she had the presence of mind to do so at the very
moment when the knife was knocked out of her hand. She had kept hold of her wand, so it had been
kept safe, too.
When the other children woke up next morning (they had been sleeping on piles of cushions in the
pavilion) the first thing they heard -from Mrs Beaver - was that their brother had been rescued and
brought into camp late last night; and was at that moment with Aslan. As soon as they had
breakfasted4 they all went out, and there they saw Aslan and Edmund walking together in the dewy
grass, apart from the rest of the court. There is no need to tell you (and no one ever heard) what Aslan
was saying, but it was a conversation which Edmund never forgot. As the others drew nearer Aslan
turned to meet them, bringing Edmund with him.
"Here is your brother," he said, "and - there is no need to talk to him about what is past."
 Edmund shook hands with each of the others and said to each of them in turn, "I'm sorry," and
everyone said, "That's all right." And then everyone wanted very hard to say something which would
make it quite clear that they were all friends with him again -something ordinary and natural -and of
course no one could think of anything in the world to say. But before they had time to feel really
awkward one of the leopards approached Aslan and said,
 "Sire, there is a messenger from the enemy who craves audience."
 "Let him approach," said Aslan.
The leopard went away and soon returned leading the Witch's dwarf.
"What is your message, Son of Earth?" asked Aslan.
"The Queen of Narnia and Empress of the Lone Islands desires a safe conduct to come and speak
with you," said the dwarf, "on a matter which is as much to your advantage as to hers."
 "Queen of Narnia, indeed!" said Mr Beaver. "Of all the cheek -"
 "Peace, Beaver," said Aslan. "All names will soon be restored to their proper owners. In the
meantime we will not dispute about them. Tell your mistress, Son of Earth, that I grant her safe 
conduct on condition that she leaves her wand behind her at that great oak."
 This was agreed to and two leopards went back with the dwarf to see that the conditions were
properly carried out. "But supposing she turns the two leopards into stone?" whispered Lucy to Peter.
I think the same idea had occurred to the leopards themselves; at any rate, as they walked off their fur
was all standing up on their backs and their tails were bristling - like a cat's when it sees a strange
dog.
"It'll be all right," whispered Peter in reply. "He wouldn't send them if it weren't."
 A few minutes later the Witch herself walked out on to the top of the hill and came straight across
and stood before Aslan. The three children who had not seen her before felt shudders running down
their backs at the sight of her face; and there were low growls among all the animals present. Though
it was bright sunshine everyone felt suddenly cold. The only two people present who seemed to be
quite at their ease were Aslan and the Witch herself. It was the oddest thing to see those two faces -
the golden face and the dead-white face so close together. Not that the Witch looked Aslan exactly in
his eyes; Mrs Beaver particularly noticed this.
"You have a traitor there, Aslan," said the Witch. Of course everyone present knew that she meant
Edmund. But Edmund had got past thinking about himself after all he'd been through and after the
talk he'd had that morning. He just went on looking at Aslan. It didn't seem to matter what the Witch
said.
"Well," said Aslan. "His offence was not against you."
 "Have you forgotten the Deep Magic?" asked the Witch.
"Let us say I have forgotten it," answered Aslan gravely. "Tell us of this Deep Magic."
 "Tell you?" said the Witch, her voice growing suddenly shriller. "Tell you what is written on that
very Table of Stone which stands beside us? Tell you what is written in letters deep as a spear is long
on the firestones on the Secret Hill? Tell you what is engraved on the sceptre of the Emperor-beyondthe-Sea?
You at least know the Magic which the Emperor put into Narnia at the very beginning. You
know that every traitor belongs to me as my lawful prey and that for every treachery I have a right to 
a kill."
 "Oh," said Mr Beaver. "So that's how you came to imagine yourself a queen - because you were the
Emperor's hangman. I see."
 "Peace, Beaver," said Aslan, with a very low growl. "And so," continued the Witch, "that human
creature is mine. His life is forfeit to me. His blood is my property."
 "Come and take it then," said the Bull with the man's head in a great bellowing voice.
"Fool," said the Witch with a savage smile that was almost a snarl, "do you really think your master
can rob me of my rights by mere force? He knows the Deep Magic better than that. He knows that
unless I have blood as the Law says all Narnia will be overturned and perish in fire and water."
 "It is very true," said Aslan, "I do not deny it."
 "Oh, Aslan!" whispered Susan in the Lion's ear, "can't we - I mean, you won't, will you? Can't we do
something about the Deep Magic? Isn't there something you can work against it?"
 "Work against the Emperor's Magic?" said Aslan, turning to her with something like a frown on his
face. And nobody ever made that suggestion to him again.
Edmund was on the other side of Aslan, looking all the time at Aslan's face. He felt a choking
feeling and wondered if he ought to say something; but a moment later he felt that he was not
expected to do anything except to wait, and do what he was told.
"Fall back, all of you," said Aslan, "and I will talk to the Witch alone."
 They all obeyed. It was a terrible time this - waiting and wondering while the Lion and the Witch
talked earnestly together in low voices. Lucy said, "Oh, Edmund!" and began to cry. Peter stood with 
his back to the others looking out at the distant sea. The Beavers stood holding each other's paws with
their heads bowed. The centaurs stamped uneasily with their hoofs. But everyone became perfectly
still in the end, so that you noticed even small sounds like a bumble-bee flying past, or the birds in
the forest down below them, or the wind rustling the leaves. And still the talk between Aslan and the
White Witch went on.
At last they heard Aslan's voice, "You can all come back," he said. "I have settled the matter. She
has renounced the claim on your brother's blood." And all over the hill there was a noise as if
everyone had been holding their breath and had now begun breathing again, and then a murmur of
talk.
The Witch was just turning away with a look of fierce joy on her face when she stopped and said,
 "But how do I know this promise will be kept?"
 "Haa-a-arrh!" roared Aslan, half rising from his throne; and his great mouth opened wider and wider
and the roar grew louder and louder, and the Witch, after staring for a moment with her lips wide
apart, picked up her skirts and fairly ran for her life.
 As soon as the Witch had gone Aslan said, "We must move from this place at once, it will be wanted
for other purposes. We shall encamp tonight at the Fords of Beruna.
Of course everyone was dying to ask him how he had arranged matters with the witch; but his face
was stern and everyone's ears were still ringing with the sound of his roar and so nobody dared.
After a meal, which was taken in the open air on the hill-top (for the sun had got strong by now and
dried the grass), they were busy for a while taking the pavilion down and packing things up. Before
two o'clock they were on the march and set off in a northeasterly direction, walking at an easy pace
for they had not far to go.
During the first part of the journey Aslan explained to Peter his plan of campaign. "As soon as she
has finished her business in these parts," he said, "the Witch and her crew will almost certainly fall
back to her House and prepare for a siege. You may or may not be able to cut her off and prevent her
from reaching it." He then went on to outline two plans of battle - one for fighting the Witch and her
people in the wood and another for assaulting her castle. And all the time he was advising Peter how
to conduct the operations, saying things like, "You must put your Centaurs in such and such a place"
or "You must post scouts to see that she doesn't do so-and-so," till at last Peter said,
 "But you will be there yourself, Aslan."
 "I can give you no promise of that," answered the Lion. And he continued giving Peter his
instructions.
For the last part of the journey it was Susan and Lucy who saw most of him. He did not talk very
much and seemed to them to be sad.
It was still afternoon when they came down to a place where the river valley had widened out and
the river was broad and shallow. This was the Fords of Beruna and Aslan gave orders to halt on this
side of the water. But Peter said,
 "Wouldn't it be better to camp on the far side - for fear she should try a night attack or anything?"
 Aslan, who seemed to have been thinking about something else, roused himself with a shake of his
magnificent mane and said, "Eh? What's that?" Peter said it all over again.
"No," said Aslan in a dull voice, as if it didn't matter. "No. She will not make an attack to-night."
And then he sighed deeply. But presently he added, "All the same it was well thought of. That is how
a soldier ought to think. But it doesn't really matter." So they proceeded to pitch their camp.
Aslan's mood affected everyone that evening. Peter was feeling uncomfortable too at the idea of
fighting the battle on his own; the news that Aslan might not be there had come as a great shock to
him. Supper that evening was a quiet meal. Everyone felt how different it had been last night or even
that morning. It was as if the good times, having just begun, were already drawing to their end.
This feeling affected Susan so much that she couldn't get to sleep when she went to bed. And after
she had lain counting sheep and turning over and over she heard Lucy give a long sigh and turn over
just beside her in the darkness.
"Can't you get to sleep either?" said Susan.
"No," said Lucy. "I thought you were asleep. I say, Susan!"
 "What?"
 "I've a most Horrible feeling - as if something were hanging over us."
 "Have you? Because, as a matter of fact, so have I."
 "Something about Aslan," said Lucy. "Either some dreadful thing is going to happen to him, or
something dreadful that he's going to do."
 "There's been something wrong with him all afternoon," said Susan. "Lucy! What was that he said
about not being with us at the battle? You don't think he could be stealing away and leaving us
tonight, do you?"
 "Where is he now?" said Lucy. "Is he here in the pavilion?"
 "I don't think so."
 "Susan! let's go outside and have a look round. We might see him."
 "All right. Let's," said Susan; "we might just as well be doing that as lying awake here."
 Very quietly the two girls groped their way among the other sleepers and crept out of the tent. The
moonlight was bright and everything was quite still except for the noise of the river chattering over
the stones. Then Susan suddenly caught Lucy's arm and said, "Look!" On the far side of the camping
ground, just where the trees began, they saw the Lion slowly walking away from them into the wood.
Without a word they both followed him.
He led them up the steep slope out of the river valley and then slightly to the right - apparently by
the very same route which they had used that afternoon in coming from the Hill of the Stone Table.
On and on he led them, into dark shadows and out into pale moonlight, getting their feet wet with the
heavy dew. He looked somehow different from the Aslan they knew. His tail and his head hung low
and he walked slowly as if he were very, very tired. Then, when they were crossing a wide open
place where there where no shadows for them to hide in, he stopped and looked round. It was no
good trying to run away so they came towards him. When they were closer he said,
 "Oh, children, children, why are you following me?"
 "We couldn't sleep," said Lucy - and then felt sure that she need say no more and that Aslan knew all
they had been thinking.
"Please, may we come with you - wherever you're going?" asked Susan.
"Well -" said Aslan, and seemed to be thinking. Then he said, "I should be glad of company tonight.
Yes, you may come, if you will promise to stop when I tell you, and after that leave me to go on
alone."
 "Oh, thank you, thank you. And we will," said the two girls.
Forward they went again and one of the girls walked on each side of the Lion. But how slowly he
walked! And his great, royal head drooped so that his nose nearly touched the grass. Presently he
stumbled and gave a low moan.
"Aslan! Dear Aslan!" said Lucy, "what is wrong? Can't you tell us?"
 "Are you ill, dear Aslan?" asked Susan.
"No," said Aslan. "I am sad and lonely. Lay your hands on my mane so that I can feel you are there
and let us walk like that."
 And so the girls did what they would never have dared to do without his permission, but what they
had longed to do ever since they first saw him buried their cold hands in the beautiful sea of fur and
stroked it and, so doing, walked with him. And presently they saw that they were going with him up
the slope of the hill on which the Stone Table stood. They went up at the side where the trees came
furthest up, and when they got to the last tree (it was one that had some bushes about it) Aslan
stopped and said,
 "Oh, children, children. Here you must stop. And whatever happens, do not let yourselves be seen.
Farewell."
 And both the girls cried bitterly (though they hardly knew why) and clung to the Lion and kissed his
mane and his nose and his paws and his great, sad eyes. Then he turned from them and walked out on
to the top of the hill. And Lucy and Susan, crouching in the bushes, looked after him, and this is what
they saw.
A great crowd of people were standing all round the Stone Table and though the moon was shining
many of them carried torches which burned with evil-looking red flames and black smoke. But such
people! Ogres with monstrous teeth, and wolves, and bull-headed men; spirits of evil trees and
poisonous plants; and other creatures whom I won't describe because if I did the grownups would
probably not let you read this book - Cruels and Hags and Incubuses, Wraiths, Horrors, Efreets,
Sprites, Orknies, Wooses, and Ettins. In fact here were all those who were on the Witch's side and
whom the Wolf had summoned at her command. And right in the middle, standing by the Table, was
the Witch herself.
A howl and a gibber of dismay went up from the creatures when they first saw the great Lion pacing
towards them, and for a moment even the Witch seemed to be struck with fear. Then she recovered 
herself and gave a wild fierce laugh.
"The fool!" she cried. "The fool has come. Bind him fast."
 Lucy and Susan held their breaths waiting for Aslan's roar and his spring upon his enemies. But it
never came. Four Hags, grinning and leering, yet also (at first) hanging back and half afraid of what
they had to do, had approached him. "Bind him, I say!" repeated the White Witch. The Hags made a
dart at him and shrieked with triumph when they found that he made no resistance at all. Then others
- evil dwarfs and apes - rushed in to help them, and between them they rolled the huge Lion over on
his back and tied all his four paws together, shouting and cheering as if they had done something
brave, though, had the Lion chosen, one of those paws could have been the death of them all. But he
made no noise, even when the enemies, straining and tugging, pulled the cords so tight that they cut
into his flesh. Then they began to drag him towards the Stone Table.
"Stop!" said the Witch. "Let him first be shaved."
 Another roar of mean laughter went up from her followers as an ogre with a pair of shears came
forward and squatted down by Aslan's head. Snip-snip-snip went the shears and masses of curling
gold began to fall to the ground. Then the ogre stood back and the children, watching from their
hiding-place, could see the face of Aslan looking all small and different without its mane. The
enemies also saw the difference.
"Why, he's only a great cat after all!" cried one.
"Is that what we were afraid of?" said another.
And they surged round Aslan, jeering at him, saying things like "Puss, Puss! Poor Pussy," and "How
many mice have you caught today, Cat?" and "Would you like a saucer of milk, Pussums?"
 "Oh, how can they?" said Lucy, tears streaming down her cheeks. "The brutes, the brutes!" for now
that the first shock was over the shorn face of Aslan looked to her braver, and more beautiful, and
more patient than ever.
"Muzzle him!" said the Witch. And even now, as they worked about his face putting on the muzzle,
one bite from his jaws would have cost two or three of them their hands. But he never moved. And
this seemed to enrage all that rabble. Everyone was at him now. Those who had been afraid to come
near him even after he was bound began to find their courage, and for a few minutes the two girls
could not even see him - so thickly was he surrounded by the whole crowd of creatures kicking him,
hitting him, spitting on him, jeering at him.
At last the rabble had had enough of this. They began to drag the bound and muzzled Lion to the
Stone Table, some pulling and some pushing. He was so huge that even when they got him there it
took all their efforts to hoist him on to the surface of it. Then there was more tying and tightening of
cords.
"The cowards! The cowards!" sobbed Susan. "Are they still afraid of him, even now?"
 When once Aslan had been tied (and tied so that he was really a mass of cords) on the flat stone, a
hush fell on the crowd. Four Hags, holding four torches, stood at the corners of the Table. The Witch
bared her arms as she had bared them the previous night when it had been Edmund instead of Aslan.
Then she began to whet her knife. It looked to the children, when the gleam of the torchlight fell on
it, as if the knife were made of stone, not of steel, and it was of a strange and evil shape.
As last she drew near. She stood by Aslan's head. Her face was working and twitching with passion,
but his looked up at the sky, still quiet, neither angry nor afraid, but a little sad. Then, just before she
gave the blow, she stooped down and said in a quivering voice,
 "And now, who has won? Fool, did you think that by all this you would save the human traitor? Now
I will kill you instead of him as our pact was and so the Deep Magic will be appeased. But when you
are dead what will prevent me from killing him as well? And who will take him out of my hand then?
Understand that you have given me Narnia forever, you have lost your own life and you have not
saved his. In that knowledge, despair and die."
 The children did not see the actual moment of the killing. They couldn't bear to look and had covered
their eyes.
 WHILE the two girls still crouched in the bushes with their hands over their faces, they heard the
voice of the Witch calling out,
 "Now! Follow me all and we will set about what remains of this war! It will not take us long to crush
the human vermin and the traitors now that the great Fool, the great Cat, lies dead."
 At this moment the children were for a few seconds in very great danger. For with wild cries and a
noise of skirling pipes and shrill horns blowing, the whole of that vile rabble came sweeping off the
hill-top and down the slope right past their hiding-place. They felt the Spectres go by them like a cold
wind and they felt the ground shake beneath them under the galloping feet of the Minotaurs; and
overhead there went a flurry of foul wings and a blackness of vultures and giant bats. At any other
time they would have trembled with fear; but now the sadness and shame and horror of Aslan's death
so filled their minds that they hardly thought of it.
As soon as the wood was silent again Susan and Lucy crept out onto the open hill-top. The moon
was getting low and thin clouds were passing across her, but still they could see the shape of the Lion
lying dead in his bonds. And down they both knelt in the wet grass and kissed his cold face and
stroked his beautiful fur - what was left of it - and cried till they could cry no more. And then they
looked at each other and held each other's hands for mere loneliness and cried again; and then again
were silent. At last Lucy said,
 "I can't bear to look at that horrible muzzle. I wonder could we take if off?"
 So they tried. And after a lot of working at it (for their fingers were cold and it was now the darkest
part of the night) they succeeded. And when they saw his face without it they burst out crying again
and kissed it and fondled it and wiped away the blood and the foam as well as they could. And it was
all more lonely and hopeless and horrid than I know how to describe.
"I wonder could we untie him as well?" said Susan presently. But the enemies, out of pure
spitefulness, had drawn the cords so tight that the girls could make nothing of the knots.
I hope no one who reads this book has been quite as miserable as Susan and Lucy were that night;
but if you have been - if you've been up all night and cried till you have no more tears left in you -
you will know that there comes in the end a sort of quietness. You feel as if nothing was ever going
to happen again. At any rate that was how it felt to these two. Hours and hours seemed to go by in
this dead calm, and they hardly noticed that they were getting colder and colder. But at last Lucy
noticed two other things. One was that the sky on the east side of the hill was a little less dark than it
had been an hour ago. The other was some tiny movement going on in the grass at her feet. At first
she took no interest in this. What did it matter? Nothing mattered now! But at last she saw that
whatever-it-was had begun to move up the upright stones of the Stone Table. And now whateverthey-were
were moving about on Aslan's body. She peered closer. They were little grey things.
"Ugh!" said Susan from the other side of the Table. "How beastly! There are horrid little mice
crawling over him. Go away, you little beasts." And she raised her hand to frighten them away.
"Wait!" said Lucy, who had been looking at them more closely still. "Can you see what they're
doing?"
 Both girls bent down and stared.
"I do believe -" said Susan. "But how queer! They're nibbling away at the cords!"
 "That's what I thought," said Lucy. "I think they're friendly mice. Poor little things - they don't
realize he's dead. They think it'll do some good untying him."
 It was quite definitely lighter by now. Each of the girls noticed for the first time the white face of the
other. They could see the mice nibbling away; dozens and dozens, even hundreds, of little field mice.
And at last, one by one, the ropes were all gnawed through.
The sky in the east was whitish by now and the stars were getting fainter - all except one very big
one low down on the eastern horizon. They felt colder than they had been all night. The mice crept
away again.
The girls cleared away the remains of the gnawed ropes. Aslan looked more like himself without
them. Every moment his dead face looked nobler, as the light grew and they could see it better.
In the wood behind them a bird gave a chuckling sound. It had been so still for hours and hours that
it startled them. Then another bird answered it. Soon there were birds singing all over the place.
It was quite definitely early morning now, not late night.
"I'm so cold," said Lucy.
"So am I," said Susan. "Let's walk about a bit."
 They walked to the eastern edge of the hill and looked down. The one big star had almost
disappeared. The country all looked dark grey, but beyond, at the very end of the world, the sea
showed pale. The sky began to turn red. They walked to ands fro more times than they could count
between the dead Aslan and the eastern ridge, trying to keep warm; and oh, how tired their legs felt.
Then at last, as they stood for a moment looking out towards they sea and Cair Paravel (which they
could now just make out) the red turned to gold along the line where the sea and the sky met and very
slowly up came the edge of the sun. At that moment they heard from behind them a loud noise - a
great cracking, deafening noise as if a giant had broken a giant's plate.
"What's that?" said Lucy, clutching Susan's arm.
"I - I feel afraid to turn round," said Susan; "something awful is happening."
 "They're doing something worse to Him," said Lucy. "Come on!" And she turned, pulling Susan
round with her.
The rising of the sun had made everything look so different - all colours and shadows were changed
that for a moment they didn't see the important thing. Then they did. The Stone Table was broken
into two pieces by a great crack that ran down it from end to end; and there was no Aslan.
"Oh, oh, oh!" cried the two girls, rushing back to the Table.
"Oh, it's too bad," sobbed Lucy; "they might have left the body alone."
 "Who's done it?" cried Susan. "What does it mean? Is it magic?"
 "Yes!" said a great voice behind their backs. "It is more magic." They looked round. There, shining
in the sunrise, larger than they had seen him before, shaking his mane (for it had apparently grown
again) stood Aslan himself.
"Oh, Aslan!" cried both the children, staring up at him, almost as much frightened as they were glad.
"Aren't you dead then, dear Aslan?" said Lucy.
"Not now," said Aslan.
"You're not - not a - ?" asked Susan in a shaky voice. She couldn't bring herself to say the word
ghost. Aslan stooped his golden head and licked her forehead. The warmth of his breath and a rich
sort of smell that seemed to hang about his hair came all over her.
"Do I look it?" he said.
"Oh, you're real, you're real! Oh, Aslan!" cried Lucy, and both girls flung themselves upon him and
covered him with kisses.
"But what does it all mean?" asked Susan when they were somewhat calmer.
"It means," said Aslan, "that though the Witch knew the Deep Magic, there is a magic deeper still 
which she did not know: Her knowledge goes back only to the dawn of time. But if she could have
looked a little further back, into the stillness and the darkness before Time dawned, she would have
read there a different incantation. She would have known that when a willing victim who had
committed no treachery was killed in a traitor's stead, the Table would crack and Death itself would
start working backwards. And now -"
 "Oh yes. Now?" said Lucy, jumping up and clapping her hands.
"Oh, children," said the Lion, "I feel my strength coming back to me. Oh, children, catch me if you
can!" He stood for a second, his eyes very bright, his limbs quivering, lashing himself with his tail.
Then he made a leap high over their heads and landed on the other side of the Table. Laughing,
though she didn't know why, Lucy scrambled over it to reach him. Aslan leaped again. A mad chase
began. Round and round the hill-top he led them, now hopelessly out of their reach, now letting them
almost catch his tail, now diving between them, now tossing them in the air with his huge and
beautifully velveted paws and catching them again, and now stopping unexpectedly so that all three
of them rolled over together in a happy laughing heap of fur and arms and legs. It was such a romp as
no one has ever had except in Narnia; and whether it was more like playing with a thunderstorm or
playing with a kitten Lucy could never make up her mind. And the funny thing was that when all
three finally lay together panting in the sun the girls no longer felt in the least tired or hungry or
thirsty.
"And now," said Aslan presently, "to business. I feel I am going to roar. You had better put your
fingers in your ears."
 And they did. And Aslan stood up and when he opened his mouth to roar his face became so terrible
that they did not dare to look at it. And they saw all the trees in front of him bend before the blast of
his roaring as grass bends in a meadow before the wind. Then he said,
 "We have a long journey to go. You must ride on me." And he crouched down and the children
climbed on to his warm, golden back, and Susan sat first, holding on tightly to his mane and Lucy sat
behind holding on tightly to Susan. And with a great heave he rose underneath them and then shot
off, faster than any horse could go, down hill and into the thick of the forest.
That ride was perhaps the most wonderful thing that happened to them in Narnia. Have you ever had
a gallop on a horse? Think of that; and then take away the heavy noise of the hoofs and the jingle of
the bits and imagine instead the almost noiseless padding of the great paws. Then imagine instead of
the black or grey or chestnut back of the horse the soft roughness of golden fur, and the mane flying
back in the wind. And then imagine you are going about twice as fast as the fastest racehorse. But this 
is a mount that doesn't need to be guided and never grows tired. He rushes on and on, never missing
his footing, never hesitating, threading his way with perfect skill between tree trunks, jumping over
bush and briar and the smaller streams, wading the larger, swimming the largest of all. And you are
riding not on a road nor in a park nor even on the downs, but right across Narnia, in spring, down
solemn avenues of beech and across sunny glades of oak, through wild orchards of snow-white
cherry trees, past roaring waterfalls and mossy rocks and echoing caverns, up windy slopes alight
with gorse bushes, and across the shoulders of heathery mountains and along giddy ridges and down,
down, down again into wild valleys and out into acres of blue flowers.
It was nearly midday when they found themselves looking down a steep hillside at a castle - a little
toy castle it looked from where they stood - which seemed to be all pointed towers. But the Lion was
rushing down at such a speed that it grew larger every moment and before they had time even to ask
themselves what it was they were already on a level with it. And now it no longer looked like a toy
castle but rose frowning in front of them. No face looked over the battlements and the gates were fast
shut. And Aslan, not at all slacking his pace, rushed straight as a bullet towards it.
"The Witch's home!" he cried. "Now, children, hold tight."
 Next moment the whole world seemed to turn upside down, and the children felt as if they had left
their insides behind them; for the Lion had gathered himself together for a greater leap than any he
had yet made and jumped - or you may call it flying rather than jumping - right over the castle wall.
The two girls, breathless but unhurt, found themselves tumbling off his back in the middle of a wide
stone courtyard full of statues.
 "WHAT an extraordinary place!" cried Lucy. "All those stone animals -and people too! It's -it's like a
museum."
 "Hush," said Susan, "Aslan's doing something."
 He was indeed. He had bounded up to the stone lion and breathed on him. Then without waiting a
moment he whisked round - almost as if he had been a cat chasing its tail -and breathed also on the 
stone dwarf, which (as you remember) was standing a few feet from the lion with his back to it. Then
he pounced on a tall stone dryad which stood beyond the dwarf, turned rapidly aside to deal with a
stone rabbit on his right, and rushed on to two centaurs. But at that moment Lucy said,
 "Oh, Susan! Look! Look at the lion."
 I expect you've seen someone put a lighted match to a bit of newspaper which is propped up in a
grate against an unlit fire. And for a second nothing seems to have happened; and then you notice a
tiny streak of flame creeping along the edge of the newspaper. It was like that now. For a second after
Aslan had breathed upon him the stone lion looked just the same. Then a tiny streak of gold began to
run along his white marble back then it spread - then the colour seemed to lick all over him as the
flame licks all over a bit of paper - then, while his hindquarters were still obviously stone, the lion
shook his mane and all the heavy, stone folds rippled into living hair. Then he opened a great red
mouth, warm and living, and gave a prodigious yawn. And now his hind legs had come to life. He
lifted one of them and scratched himself. Then, having caught sight of Aslan, he went bounding after
him and frisking round him whimpering with delight and jumping up to lick his face.
Of course the children's eyes turned to follow the lion; but the sight they saw was so wonderful that
they soon forgot about him. Everywhere the statues were coming to life. The courtyard looked no
longer like a museum; it looked more like a zoo. Creatures were running after Aslan and dancing
round him till he was almost hidden in the crowd. Instead of all that deadly white the courtyard was
now a blaze of colours; glossy chestnut sides of centaurs, indigo horns of unicorns, dazzling plumage
of birds, reddy-brown of foxes, dogs and satyrs, yellow stockings and crimson hoods of dwarfs; and
the birch-girls in silver, and the beech-girls in fresh, transparent green, and the larch-girls in green so
bright that it was almost yellow. And instead of the deadly silence the whole place rang with the
sound of happy roarings, brayings, yelpings, barkings, squealings, cooings, neighings, stampings,
shouts, hurrahs, songs and laughter.
"Oh!" said Susan in a different tone. "Look! I wonder - I mean, is it safe?"
 Lucy looked and saw that Aslan had just breathed on the feet of the stone giant.
"It's all right!" shouted Aslan joyously. "Once the feet are put right, all the rest of him will follow."
 "That wasn't exactly what I meant," whispered Susan to Lucy. But it was too late to do anything
about it now even if Aslan would have listened to her. The change was already creeping up the 
Giant's legs. Now he was moving his feet. A moment later he lifted his club off his shoulder, rubbed
his eyes and said,
 "Bless me! I must have been asleep. Now! Where's that dratted little Witch that was running about
on the ground. Somewhere just by my feet it was." But when everyone had shouted up to him to
explain what had really happened, and when the Giant had put his hand to his ear and got them to
repeat it all again so that at last he understood, then he bowed down till his head was no further off
than the top of a haystack and touched his cap repeatedly to Aslan, beaming all over his honest ugly
face. (Giants of any sort are now so rare in England and so few giants are good-tempered that ten to
one you have never seen a giant when his face is beaming. It's a sight well worth looking at.)
 "Now for the inside of this house!" said Aslan. "Look alive, everyone. Up stairs and down stairs and
in my lady's chamber! Leave no corner unsearched. You never know where some poor prisoner may
be concealed."
 And into the interior they all rushed and for several minutes the whole of that dark, horrible, fusty
old castle echoed with the opening of windows and with everyone's voices crying out at once, "Don't
forget the dungeons - Give us a hand with this door! Here's another little winding stair - Oh! I say.
Here's a poor kangaroo. Call Aslan - Phew! How it smells in here - Look out for trap-doors - Up
here! There are a whole lot more on the landing!" But the best of all was when Lucy came rushing
upstairs shouting out,
 "Aslan! Aslan! I've found Mr Tumnus. Oh, do come quick."
 A moment later Lucy and the little Faun were holding each other by both hands and dancing round
and round for joy. The little chap was none the worse for having been a statue and was of course very
interested in all she had to tell him.
But at last the ransacking of the Witch's fortress was ended. The whole castle stood empty with
every door and window open and the light and the sweet spring air flooding into all the dark and evil
places which needed them so badly. The whole crowd of liberated statues surged back into the
courtyard. And it was then that someone (Tumnus, I think) first said,
 "But how are we going to get out?" for Aslan had got in by a jump and the gates were still locked.
"That'll be all right," said Aslan; and then, rising on his hind-legs, he bawled up at the Giant. "Hi!
You up there," he roared. "What's your name?"
 "Giant Rumblebuffin, if it please your honour," said the Giant, once more touching his cap.
"Well then, Giant Rumblebuffin," said Aslan, "just let us out of this, will you?"
 "Certainly, your honour. It will be a pleasure," said Giant Rumblebuffin. "Stand well away from the
gates, all you little 'uns." Then he strode to the gate himself and bang - bang - bang - went his huge
club. The gates creaked at the first blow, cracked at the second, and shivered at the third. Then he
tackled the towers on each side of them and after a few minutes of crashing and thudding both the
towers and a good bit of the wall on each side went thundering down in a mass of hopeless rubble;
and when the dust cleared it was odd, standing in that dry, grim, stony yard, to see through the gap all
the grass and waving trees and sparkling streams of the forest, and the blue hills beyond that and
beyond them the sky.
"Blowed if I ain't all in a muck sweat," said the Giant, puffing like the largest railway engine.
"Comes of being out of condition. I suppose neither of you young ladies has such a thing as a pockethandkerchee
about you?"
 "Yes, I have," said Lucy, standing on tip-toes and holding her handkerchief up as far as she could
reach.
"Thank you, Missie," said Giant Rumblebuffin, stooping down. Next moment Lucy got rather a
fright for she found herself caught up in mid-air between the Giant's finger and thumb. But just as she
was getting near his face he suddenly started and then put her gently back on the ground muttering,
"Bless me! I've picked up the little girl instead. I beg your pardon, Missie, I thought you was the
handkerchee!"
 "No, no," said Lucy laughing, "here it is!" This time he managed to get it but it was only about the
same size to him that a saccharine tablet would be to you, so that when she saw him solemnly
rubbing it to and fro across his great red face, she said, "I'm afraid it's not much use to you, Mr
Rumblebuffin."
 "Not at all. Not at all," said the giant politely. "Never met a nicer handkerchee. So fine, so handy. So
- I don't know how to describe it."
 "What a nice giant he is!" said Lucy to Mr Tumnus.
"Oh yes," replied the Faun. "All the Buffins always were. One of the most respected of all the giant
families in Narnia. Not very clever, perhaps (I never knew a giant that was), but an old family. With
traditions, you know. If he'd been the other sort she'd never have turned him into stone."
 At this point Aslan clapped his paws together and called for silence.
"Our day's work is not yet over," he said, "and if the Witch is to be finally defeated before bed-time
we must find the battle at once."
 "And join in, I hope, sir!" added the largest of the Centaurs.
"Of course," said Aslan. "And now! Those who can't keep up - that is, children, dwarfs, and small
animals - must ride on the backs of those who can - that is, lions, centaurs, unicorns, horses, giants
and eagles. Those who are good with their noses must come in front with us lions to smell out where
the battle is. Look lively and sort yourselves."
 And with a great deal of bustle and cheering they did. The most pleased of the lot was the other lion
who kept running about everywhere pretending to be very busy but really in order to say to everyone
he met. "Did you hear what he said? Us Lions. That means him and me. Us Lions. That's what I like
about Aslan. No side, no stand-off-ishness. Us Lions. That meant him and me." At least he went on
saying this till Aslan had loaded him up with three dwarfs, one dryad, two rabbits, and a hedgehog.
That steadied him a bit.
When all were ready (it was a big sheep-dog who actually helped Aslan most in getting them sorted
into their proper order) they set out through the gap in the castle wall. At first the lions and dogs went
nosing about in all directions. But then suddenly one great hound picked up the scent and gave a bay.
There was no time lost after that. Soon all the dogs and lions and wolves and other hunting animals
were going at full speed with their noses to the ground, and all the others, streaked out for about half 
a mile behind them, were following as fast as they could. The noise was like an English fox-hunt only
better because every now and then with the music of the hounds was mixed the roar of the other lion
and sometimes the far deeper and more awful roar of Aslan himself. Faster and faster they went as
the scent became easier and easier to follow. And then, just as they came to the last curve in a narrow,
winding valley, Lucy heard above all these noises another noise - a different one, which gave her a
queer feeling inside. It was a noise of shouts and shrieks and of the clashing of metal against metal.
Then they came out of the narrow valley and at once she saw the reason. There stood Peter and
Edmund and all the rest of Aslan's army fighting desperately against the crowd of horrible creatures
whom she had seen last night; only now, in the daylight, they looked even stranger and more evil and
more deformed. There also seemed to be far more of them. Peter's army - which had their backs to
her looked terribly few. And there werestatues dotted all over the battlefield, so apparently the Witch
had been using her wand. But she did not seem to be using it now. She was fighting with her stone
knife. It was Peter she was fightin - both of them going at it so hard that Lucy could hardly make out
what was happening; she only saw the stone knife and Peter's sword flashing so quickly that they
looked like three knives and three swords. That pair were in the centre. On each side the line
stretched out. Horrible things were happening wherever she looked.
"Off my back, children," shouted Aslan. And they both tumbled off. Then with a roar that shook all
Narnia from the western lamp-post to the shores of the eastern sea the great beast flung himself upon
the White Witch. Lucy saw her face lifted towards him for one second with an expression of terror
and amazement. Then Lion and Witch had rolled over together but with the Witch underneath; and at
the same moment all war-like creatures whom Aslan had led from the Witch's house rushed madly on
the enemy lines, dwarfs with their battleaxes, dogs with teeth, the Giant with his club (and his feet
also crushed dozens of the foe), unicorns with their horns, centaurs with swords and hoofs. And
Peter's tired army cheered, and the newcomers roared, and the enemy squealed and gibbered till the
wood re-echoed with the din of that onset.
 THE battle was all over a few minutes after their arrival. Most of the enemy had been killed in the
first charge of Aslan and his -companions; and when those who were still living saw that the Witch
was dead they either gave themselves up or took to flight. The next thing that Lucy knew was that
Peter and Aslan were shaking hands. It was strange to her to see Peter looking as he looked now - his
face was so pale and stern and he seemed so much older.
"It was all Edmund's doing, Aslan," Peter was saying. "We'd have been beaten if it hadn't been for 
him. The Witch was turning our troops into stone right and left. But nothing would stop him. He
fought his way through three ogres to where she was just turning one of your leopards into a statue.
And when he reached her he had sense to bring his sword smashing down on her wand instead of
trying to go for her directly and simply getting made a statue himself for his pains. That was the
mistake all the rest were making. Once her wand was broken we began to have some chance - if we
hadn't lost so many already. He was terribly wounded. We must go and see him."
 They found Edmund in charge of Mrs Beaver a little way back from the fighting line. He was
covered with blood, his mouth was open, and his face a nasty green colour.
"Quick, Lucy," said Aslan.
And then, almost for the first time, Lucy remembered the precious cordial that had been given her
for a Christmas present. Her hands trembled so much that she could hardly undo the stopper, but she
managed it in the end and poured a few drops into her brother's mouth.
"There are other people wounded," said Aslan while she was still looking eagerly into Edmund's
pale face and wondering if the cordial would have any result.
"Yes, I know," said Lucy crossly. "Wait a minute."
 "Daughter of Eve," said Aslan in a graver voice, "others also are at the point of death. Must more
people die for Edmund?"
 "I'm sorry, Aslan," said Lucy, getting up and going with him. And for the next half-hour they were
busy - she attending to the wounded while he restored those who had been turned into stone. When at
last she was free to come back to Edmund she found him standing on his feet and not only healed of
his wounds but looking better than she had seen him look - oh, for ages; in fact ever since his first
term at that horrid school which was where he had begun to go wrong. He had become his real old
self again and could look you in the face. And there on the field of battle Aslan made him a knight.
"Does he know," whispered Lucy to Susan, "what Aslan did for him? Does he know what the
arrangement with the Witch really was?"
 "Hush! No. Of course not," said Susan.
"Oughtn't he to be told?" said Lucy.
"Oh, surely not," said Susan. "It would be too awful for him. Think how you'd feel if you were he."
 "All the same I think he ought to know," said Lucy. But at that moment they were interrupted.
That night they slept where they were. How Aslan provided food for them all I don't know; but
somehow or other they found themselves all sitting down on the grass to a fine high tea at about eight
o'clock. Next day they began marching eastward down the side of the great river. And the next day
after that, at about teatime, they actually reached the mouth. The castle of Cair Paravel on its little hill
towered up above them; before them were the sands, with rocks and little pools of salt water, and
seaweed, and the smell of the sea and long miles of bluish-green waves breaking for ever and ever on
the beach. And oh, the cry of the sea-gulls! Have you heard it? Can you remember?
 That evening after tea the four children all managed to get down to the beach again and get their
shoes and stockings off and feel the sand between their toes. But next day was more solemn. For
then, in the Great Hall of Cair Paravel - that wonderful hall with the ivory roof and the west wall
hung with peacock's feathers and the eastern door which looks towards the sea, in the presence of all
their friends and to the sound of trumpets, Aslan solemnly crowned them and led them to the four
thrones amid deafening shouts of, "Long Live King Peter! Long Live Queen Susan! Long Live King
Edmund! Long Live Queen Lucy!"
 "Once a king or queen in Narnia, always a king or queen. Bear it well, Sons of Adam! Bear it well,
Daughters of Eve!" said Aslan.
And through the eastern door, which was wide open, came the voices of the mermen and the
mermaids swimming close to the shore and singing in honour of their new Kings and Queens.
So the children sat on their thrones and sceptres were put into their hands and they gave rewards and
honours to all their friends, to Tumnus the Faun, and to the Beavers, and Giant Rumblebuffin, to the 
leopards, and the good centaurs, and the good dwarfs, and to the lion. And that night there was a great
feast in Cair Paravel, and revelry and dancing, and gold flashed and wine flowed, and answering to
the music inside, but stranger, sweeter, and more piercing, came the music of the sea people.
But amidst all these rejoicings Aslan himself quietly slipped away. And when the Kings and Queens
noticed that he wasn't there they said nothing about it. For Mr Beaver had warned them, "He'll be
coming and going," he had said. "One day you'll see him and another you won't. He doesn't like being
tied down and of course he has other countries to attend to. It's quite all right. He'll often drop in.
Only you mustn't press him. He's wild,' you know. Not like a tame lion."
And now, as you see, this story is nearly (but not quite) at an end. These two Kings and two Queens
governed Narnia well, and long and happy was their reign. At first much of their time was spent in
seeking out the remnants of the White Witch's army and destroying them, and indeed for a long time
there would be news of evil things lurking in the wilder parts of the forest - a haunting here and a
killing there, a glimpse of a werewolf one month and a rumour of a hag the next. But in the end all
that foul brood was stamped out. And they made good laws and kept the peace and saved good trees
from being unnecessarily cut down, and liberated young dwarfs and young satyrs from being sent to
school, and generally stopped busybodies and interferers and encouraged ordinary people who
wanted to live and let live. And they drove back the fierce giants (quite a different sort from Giant
Rumblebuffin) on the north of Narnia when these ventured across the frontier. And they entered into
friendship and alliance with countries beyond the sea and paid them visits of state and received visits
of state from them. And they themselves grew and changed as the years passed over them. And Peter
became a tall and deep-chested man and a great warrior, and he was called King Peter the
Magnificent. And Susan grew into a tall and gracious woman with black hair that fell almost to her
feet and the kings of the countries beyond the sea began to send ambassadors asking for her hand in
marriage. And she was called Susan the Gentle. Edmund was a graver and quieter man than Peter,
and great in council and judgement. He was called King Edmund the Just. But as for Lucy, she was
always gay and golden-haired, and all princes in those parts desired her to be their Queen, and her
own people called her Queen Lucy the Valiant.
So they lived in great joy and if ever they remembered their life in this world it was only as one
remembers a dream. And one year it fell out that Tumnus (who was a middle-aged Faun by now and
beginning to be stout) came down river and brought them news that the White Stag had once more
appeared in his parts - the White Stag who would give you wishes if you caught him. So these two
Kings and two Queens with the principal members of their court, rode a-hunting with horns and
hounds in the Western Woods to follow the White Stag. And they had not hunted long before they
had a sight of him. And he led them a great pace over rough and smooth and through thick and thin,
till the horses of all the courtiers were tired out and these four were still following. And they saw the
stag enter into a thicket where their horses could not follow. Then said King Peter (for they talked in
quite a different style now, having been Kings and Queens for so long), "Fair Consorts, let us now
alight from our horses and follow this beast into the thicket; for in all my days I never hunted a nobler
quarry."
 "Sir," said the others, "even so let us do."
 So they alighted and tied their horses to trees and went on into the thick wood on foot. And as soon
as they had entered it Queen Susan said,
 "Fair friends, here is a great marvel, for I seem to see a tree of iron."
 "Madam," said,King Edmund, "if you look well upon it you shall see it is a pillar of iron with a
lantern set on the top thereof."
 "By the Lion's Mane, a strange device," said King Peter, "to set a lantern here where the trees cluster
so thick about it and so high above it that if it were lit it should give light to no man!"
 "Sir," said Queen Lucy. "By likelihood when this post and this lamp were set here there were smaller
trees in the place, or fewer, or none. For this is a young wood and the iron post is old." And they
stood looking upon it. Then said King Edmund,
 "I know not how it is, but this lamp on the post worketh upon me strangely. It runs in my mind that I
have seen the like before; as it were in a dream, or in the dream of a dream."
 "Sir," answered they all, "it is even so with us also."
 "And more," said Queen Lucy, "for it will not go out of my mind that if we pass this post and lantern
either we shall find strange adventures or else some great change of our fortunes."
 "Madam," said King Edmund, "the like foreboding stirreth in my heart also."
 "And in mine, fair brother," said King Peter.
"And in mine too," said Queen Susan. "Wherefore by my counsel we shall lightly return to our
horses and follow this White Stag no further."
 "Madam," said King Peter, "therein I pray thee to have me excused. For never since we four were
Kings and Queens in Narnia have we set our hands to any high matter, as battles, quests, feats of
arms, acts of justice, and the like, and then given over; but always what we have taken in hand, the
same we have achieved."
 "Sister," said Queen Lucy, "my royal brother speaks rightly. And it seems to me we should be
shamed if for any fearing or foreboding we turned back from following so noble a beast as now we
have in chase."
 "And so say I," said King Edmund. "And I have such desire to find the signification of this thing that
I would not by my good will turn back for the richest jewel in all Narnia and all the islands."
 "Then in the name of Aslan," said Queen Susan, "if ye will all have it so, let us go on and take the
adventure that shall fall to us."
 So these Kings and Queens entered the thicket, and before they had gone a score of paces they all
remembered that the thing they had seen was called a lamppost, and before they had gone twenty
more they noticed that they were. making their way not through branches but through coats. And next
moment they all came tumbling out of a wardrobe door into the empty room, and They were no
longer Kings and Queens in their hunting array but just Peter, Susan, Edmund and Lucy in their old
clothes. It was the same day and the same hour of the day on which they had all gone into the
wardrobe to hide. Mrs Macready and the visitors were still talking in the passage; but luckily they
never came into the empty room and so the children weren't caught.
And that would have been the very end of the story if it hadn't been that they felt they really must
explain to the Professor why four of the coats out of his wardrobe were missing. And the Professor,
who was a very remarkable man, didn't tell them not to be silly or not to tell lies, but believed the
whole story. "No," he said, "I don't think it will be any good trying to go back through the wardrobe
door to get the coats. You won't get into Narnia again by that route. Nor would the coats be much use
by now if you did! Eh? What's that? Yes, of course you'll get back to Narnia again some day. Once a
King in Narnia, always a King in Narnia. But don't go trying to use the same route twice.
 Indeed, don't try to get there at all. It'll happen when you're not looking for it. And don't talk too
much about it even among yourselves. And don't mention it to anyone else unless you find that
they've had adventures of the same sort themselves. What's that? How will you know? Oh, you'll
know all right. Odd things they say - even their looks - will let the secret out. Keep your eyes open.
Bless me, what do they teach them at these schools?
 And that is the very end of the adventure of the wardrobe.
 But if the Professor was right it was only the beginning of the adventures of Narnia.
 The End.
go
C.S.Lewis. Mere christianity
---------------------------------------------------------------
     1943
     Scan and OCR by Copper Kettle aka T.A.G, 2003-12-21. Yekaterinburg.
     Corrected: vladioan
     Spellcheck: Andrew B Robertson, 07.01.2005
---------------------------------------------------------------
C.S.Lewis. Mere Christianity
     Born in Ireland  in  1898, C. S. Lewis was educated  at Malvern College
for a year and then privately. He gained  a triple first at Oxford and was a
Fellow and Tutor at Magdalen College 1925-54. In 1954 he became Professor of
Mediaeval and Renaissance Literature at Cambridge. He was an outstanding and
popular lecturer and had a lasting influence on his pupils.
     C. S. Lewis was for many years an atheist, and described his conversion
in  Surprised by Joy: 'In the Trinity term of  1929 I  gave in, and admitted
that God was God ... perhaps the most dejected  and reluctant convert in all
England.'  It was  this  experience that  helped  him to understand not only
apathy  but active  unwillingness to  accept religion, and,  as  a Christian
writer, gifted with an exceptionally brilliant and logical mind and a lucid,
lively  style,  he was  without peer.  The  Problem  of  Pain, The Screwtape
Letters,  Mere  Christianity,  The Four  Loves  and  the Posthumous  Prayer:
Letters to Malcolm, are only  a few of his best-selling works. He also wrote
some delightful books for  children and some  science fiction, besides  many
works  of literary criticism. His works are known to  millions of people all
over the world in  translation. He died on 22nd November, 1963, at  his home
in Oxford.
     Preface
     The contents  of  this  book were  first  given  on the air,  and  then
published in three separate parts as The Case for Christianity  (1943),  (*)
Christian Behaviour (1943),  and Beyond  Personality (1945). In  the printed
versions I made a few  additions to  what I had said at the  microphone, but
otherwise left the text much as it had been. A "talk" on the radio should, I
think, be as like real talk as possible, and should  not sound like an essay
being read aloud. In my talks I had therefore used  all the contractions and
colloquialisms I  ordinarily use in conversation. In  the  printed version I
reproduced  this,  putting don't  and we've  for do not  and  we  have.  And
wherever, in  the talks,  I had made the importance of  a word  clear by the
emphasis of my voice, I printed it in italics.
     ----
     [*] Published in England under the title Broadcast Talks.
     ----
     I  am  now  inclined to think that  this was a  mistake-an  undesirable
hybrid between the art of speaking and the art of writing. A talker ought to
use variations  of  voice  for emphasis because his  medium  naturally lends
itself to that method: but  a  writer ought not to  use italics for the same
purpose. He has his own, different, means of bringing out  the key words and
ought to use them.  In  this edition I  have  expanded the  contractions and
replaced  most of the  italics  by recasting  the  sentences  in which  they
occurred:  but  without  altering, I hope, the  "popular" or "familiar" tone
which I  had all  along  intended.  I  have also added  and deleted  where I
thought I understood any part of my subject better now than ten years ago or
where I knew that the original version had been misunderstood by others.
     The  reader should be warned  that  I offer no  help  to anyone who  is
hesitating between two Christian "denominations." You will not learn from me
whether you ought to become an  Anglican, a  Methodist, a Presbyterian, or a
Roman Catholic.
     This  omission  is intentional (even in  the list I have just given the
order is alphabetical). There is no mystery about  my  own position. I  am a
very ordinary layman of  the  Church of England, not especially "high,"  nor
especially  "low," nor especially anything  else. But in  this book I am not
trying to convert anyone to my own position. Ever since I became a Christian
I have thought that  the best, perhaps the  only, service I  could do for my
unbelieving  neighbours was to explain and defend  the belief that  has been
common to nearly all Christians at all times. I had more than one reason for
thinking this. In  the first  place,  the  questions which divide Christians
from  one  another  often  involve  points  of  high  Theology  or  even  of
ecclesiastical  history which  ought  never  to  be treated except  by  real
experts.
     I should have been out of my depth in such waters: more in need of help
myself than able to help  others. And secondly, I think we must  admit  that
the  discussion of these disputed  points has no tendency at all to bring an
outsider into the Christian fold. So long as we write and talk about them we
are much more likely to deter him from entering any Christian communion than
to  draw him into our own. Our divisions should never be discussed except in
the presence of those who have already come to believe that there is one God
and that  Jesus Christ is His only Son.  Finally, I got  the impression that
far  more,  and  more  talented,  authors  were  already  engaged  in   such
controversial  matters  than  in  the defence of what  Baxter  calls  "mere"
Christianity.  That part of the line where I thought I could serve  best was
also the part that seemed to be thinnest. And to it I naturally went.
     So far as I know, these were my only motives, and I should be very glad
if  people  would not  draw fanciful  inferences  from my silence on certain
disputed matters.
     For example, such silence need not mean that I myself am sitting on the
fence. Sometimes I  am.  There are questions  at issue between Christians to
which I do not think I have the answer. There are some  to which I may never
know the answer: if I asked them, even in a better world, I might (for all I
know) be answered as a far greater questioner was answered: "What is that to
thee?  Follow  thou Me."  But there  are  other questions as  to which I  am
definitely on one side of  the  fence, and yet  say nothing.  For I was  not
writing to  expound  something I  could  call "my  religion," but to expound
"mere" Christianity, which is  what it is  and was what it was long before I
was born and whether I like it or not.
     Some people draw unwarranted conclusions from the fact that I never say
more about the Blessed Virgin Mary than is involved in asserting  the Virgin
Birth of Christ.  But surely my reason  for not doing so  is obvious? To say
more would take  me  at once into highly controversial regions. And there is
no controversy between Christians which needs to be so delicately touched as
this. The Roman  Catholic beliefs on that subject are held not only with the
ordinary fervour  that attaches to  all sincere  religious belief, but (very
naturally) with  the peculiar and, as it were, chivalrous sensibility that a
man feels when the honour of his mother or his beloved is at stake.
     It is very difficult so to dissent from them  that you will  not appear
to them a cad as well as a heretic. And contrariwise, the opposed Protestant
beliefs on this  subject call forth feelings which go down to the very roots
of  all  Monotheism whatever.  To radical  Protestants  it  seems  that  the
distinction between Creator and creature (however holy) is  imperilled: that
Polytheism is risen again. Hence it is hard so to dissent from them that you
will not appear something worse than a heretic-an idolater, a Pagan. If  any
topic  could be relied upon to wreck a book about "mere" Christianity-if any
topic makes  utterly unprofitable reading for  those who do not yet  believe
that the Virgin's son is God-surely this is it.
     Oddly  enough, you cannot  even  conclude, from my silence on  disputed
points, either that I think them important or that I think them unimportant.
For this is itself one of the disputed points. One of  the things Christians
are  disagreed  about  is  the importance of  their  disagreements. When two
Christians of different denominations start arguing, it is  usually not long
before one asks whether such-and-such a point "really matters" and the other
replies: "Matter? Why, it's absolutely essential."
     All this is  said simply in order to make clear what kind of book I was
trying to write; not  in the least to conceal or evade responsibility for my
own beliefs. About  those, as I  said before, there is  no  secret. To quote
Uncle Toby: "They are written in the Common-Prayer Book."
     The danger dearly was that I should  put forward as common Christianity
anything that  was peculiar to  the  Church of England or  (worse  still) to
myself. I tried to guard against this by sending the original script of what
is  now Book  II to four clergymen (Anglican, Methodist, Presbyterian, Roman
Catholic)  and asking for  their criticism. The Methodist thought I  had not
said enough about Faith, and  the  Roman Catholic thought I had gone  rather
too far about the comparative unimportance of theories in explanation of the
Atonement.  Otherwise  all  five  of  us  were agreed.  I did not  have  the
remaining books similarly "vetted" because in them, though differences might
arise  among Christians, these would be  differences between  individuals or
schools of thought, not between denominations.
     So far  as I  can  judge from  reviews and from  the  numerous  letters
written  to  me,  the book, however  faulty  in other respects, did at least
succeed  in  presenting  an  agreed,  or  common,  or   central,  or  "mere"
Christianity. In that way it  may possibly be of some help  in silencing the
view that, if  we omit the disputed points, we shall have  left only a vague
and bloodless H.C.F. The H.C.F. turns out to be something  not only positive
but pungent; divided from all non-Christian beliefs  by a chasm to which the
worst divisions inside Christendom are not really comparable at all.
     If I have not directly helped the cause of reunion, I have perhaps made
it clear why we ought to  be reunited. Certainly I  have met with little  of
the fabled odium theologicum from convinced members of communions  different
from my  own. Hostility  has come more from borderline people whether within
the  Church of England  or  without  it: men not  exactly  obedient  to  any
communion. This I find  curiously consoling. It is at  her centre, where her
truest children dwell, that each communion  is really closest to every other
in spirit, if not in doctrine.  And this suggests that at the centre of each
there is something, or a Someone, who against all divergences of belief, all
differences of temperament,  all memories of mutual persecution, speaks with
the same voice.
     So much for my  omissions on doctrine.  In Book III,  which deals  with
morals, I have also  passed over some things in silence, but for a different
reason. Ever since I served as an infantryman in the first world war I  have
had  a great  dislike of people  who, themselves in ease and  safety,  issue
exhortations to men in the  front line. As a result I  have a  reluctance to
say much  about temptations  to  which I  myself  am not exposed.  No man, I
suppose, is tempted to every sin. It so happens that the impulse which makes
men gamble has been left out of my make-up; and, no doubt, I pay for this by
lacking  some  good  impulse of which  it  is  the  excess or perversion.  I
therefore did not feel myself qualified to give advice about permissable and
impermissable  gambling: if there is any permissable, for I do not  claim to
know  even that. I  have also said  nothing about  birth-control. I am not a
woman nor even a married man, nor am I a priest. I did not think it my place
to  take a  firm  line about  pains, dangers  and  expenses from  which I am
protected; having no pastoral office which obliged me to do so.
     Far deeper objections may be  felt-and have been expressed- against  my
use of the  word Christian to mean one  who  accepts the common doctrines of
Christianity. People ask: "Who are you, to lay down who is, and who is not a
Christian?" or "May not many a man who cannot believe these doctrines be far
more truly  a  Christian, far closer to the  spirit of Christ, than some who
do?"  Now this  objection is in  one sense very right, very charitable, very
spiritual, very sensitive. It has every amiable quality except that of being
useful. We simply cannot, without disaster, use  language as these objectors
want us to use it. I will  try to make this clear by the history of another,
and very much less important, word.
     The word gentleman originally meant something recognisable; one who had
a  coat  of  arms  and  some  landed  property. When you  called  someone "a
gentleman" you were not paying him a compliment, but merely stating a  fact.
If you said he was not "a gentleman" you were not  insulting him, but giving
information. There was no contradiction in saying that John was a liar and a
gentleman; any more than there now  is in saying that James is a fool and an
M.A.  But  then  there  came   people   who  said-so  rightly,   charitably,
spiritually,  sensitively,  so  anything  but  usefully-"Ah, but  surely the
important thing about a gentleman is not the  coat of arms and the land, but
the behaviour?  Surely he is the  true gentleman who behaves  as a gentleman
should?  Surely in  that sense  Edward is far  more  truly a gentleman  than
John?"
     They meant well. To be honourable and courteous and brave is  of course
a  far better thing than  to have a  coat  of arms.  But it  is not the same
thing.  Worse still,  it is not a thing everyone will agree about. To call a
man "a gentleman" in this new, refined sense, becomes, in fact, not a way of
giving information about him, but a way of praising him: to  deny that he is
"a gentleman" becomes simply  a way of insulting him. When a  word ceases to
be a term  of description and  becomes merely a term of praise, it no longer
tells  you  facts about the object: it  only tells you  about the  speaker's
attitude to that object.  (A  "nice"  meal  only means  a  meal  the speaker
likes.)
     A gentleman, once it has been  spiritualised and refined out of its old
coarse,  objective  sense, means  hardly more than a  man whom  the  speaker
likes. As a result, gentleman is now a useless word. We had lots of terms of
approval  already,  so it was not needed for that use;  on the other hand if
anyone  (say, in  a historical work) wants  to  use  it in its old sense, he
cannot do so without explanations. It has been spoiled for that purpose.
     Now if once we allow people to start spiritualising and refining, or as
they might say "deepening,"  the  sense of the word Christian,  it too  will
speedily become a  useless  word.  In the first place, Christians themselves
will never be able  to apply it to anyone. It  is not for us to say who,  in
the deepest sense, is or is not close to the spirit of Christ. We do not see
into men's hearts. We cannot judge, and are indeed forbidden to judge.
     It would be wicked arrogance for us to say that  any man is, or is not,
a Christian in this refined sense. And obviously a word which  we can  never
apply is not  going to be a  very  useful word. As for the unbelievers, they
will no doubt cheerfully use the word in the refined  sense.  It will become
in their mouths simply a term of praise. In calling anyone a Christian  they
will mean that they think him  a good man.  But  that  way of using the word
will be no enrichment of the language, for  we already  have the word  good.
Meanwhile, the word  Christian will have been spoiled for any  really useful
purpose it might have served.
     We must therefore  stick to  the  original,  obvious meaning. The  name
Christians was first given at  Antioch (Acts xi. 26) to "the  disciples," to
those who accepted the teaching of the apostles. There is no question of its
being  restricted  to  those  who profited by that teaching as much as  they
should have. There is no question of its being extended to those who in some
refined, spiritual, inward fashion were "far closer to the spirit of Christ"
than the less satisfactory of the disciples. The point is not a theological,
or moral  one.  It is  only a  question of  using words so  that we  can all
understand what is being said. When a man who accepts the Christian doctrine
lives unworthily of it, it is much clearer to say he is a bad Christian than
to say he is not a Christian.
     I  hope no  reader will  suppose  that  "mere" Christianity is here put
forward as an alternative to the  creeds of the  existing communions-as if a
man could adopt it in preference  to Congregationalism or Greek Orthodoxy or
anything else. It is more like a hall  out of  which doors open into several
rooms. If  I  can bring  anyone  into  that hall  I shall have done  what  I
attempted. But it is in the rooms, not in the hall, that there are fires and
chairs and meals. The hall  is a place to wait in, a place from which to try
the various doors, not a place to live in. For that purpose the worst of the
rooms (whichever that may be) is, I think, preferable.
     It  is true that some people may find they have to wait in the hall for
a considerable  time, while  others  feel certain almost  at once which door
they must knock at. I  do  not  know why there is this difference, but I  am
sure  God keeps no one  waiting unless He  sees that it is good  for  him to
wait. When you do  get into your room  you will  find that the long wait has
done you some kind of good which  you  would not have had otherwise. But you
must  regard  it  as waiting, not as  camping.  You must keep on praying for
light: and, of  course,  even in the hall, you must begin trying to obey the
rules which are common to  the whole house. And above all you must be asking
which door is the true one; not which  pleases  you  best by  its paint  and
paneling.
     In plain language, the question should never be: "Do  I like that  kind
of  service?"  but  "Are these doctrines  true:  Is holiness  here?  Does my
conscience move me towards this? Is my reluctance to knock at this  door due
to  my  pride, or  my  mere taste, or my personal dislike of this particular
door-keeper?"
     When you have reached your own room, be  kind to those  Who have chosen
different  doors and to those who are still in the  hall. If they  are wrong
they  need your prayers all the more; and if they are your enemies, then you
are  under orders to pray for them. That  is one of the rules common  to the
whole house.
Contents
     Every one  has heard people quarrelling. Sometimes  it sounds funny and
sometimes it sounds merely  unpleasant; but however it sounds,  I believe we
can learn something very important from listening to the kind of things they
say. They say things like this: "How'd you like it if anyone did the same to
you?"-"That's my seat, I  was there  first"-"Leave him alone, he isn't doing
you  any  harm"-  "Why should  you  shove in first?"-"Give me a  bit of your
orange, I gave you a bit of mine"-"Come on, you promised." People say things
like that  every day, educated people as well as uneducated, and children as
well as grown-ups. Now what interests me about all these remarks is that the
man who makes them is not merely saying  that the other man's behaviour does
not  happen to  please him.  He is  appealing  to some kind of  standard  of
behaviour  which he expects  the  other man to know about. And the other man
very seldom replies: "To hell with your standard." Nearly always he tries to
make out  that  what  he  has been  doing  does  not really  go against  the
standard, or that if it does there is some special excuse. He pretends there
is some  special reason in this particular case why the person  who took the
seat first should not  keep it, or that things were quite different  when he
was given the bit of orange, or that something  has turned up which lets him
off keeping his promise. It looks, in fact, very much as if both parties had
in  mind  some kind of  Law or  Rule  of  fair play  or decent  behaviour or
morality or  whatever you like to  call it, about which they  really agreed.
And they have. If they had not, they might,  of course, fight  like animals,
but they could not quarrel in the human sense of the word. Quarrelling means
trying to  show  that the  other man is  in the wrong. And there would be no
sense in  trying to do that  unless you and he had some sort of agreement as
to what Right and Wrong are; just as  there would be no sense in saying that
a footballer had committed a foul  unless there was some agreement about the
rules of football.
     Now this Law or Rule about Right and Wrong used to be called the Law of
Nature.  Nowadays,  when we talk of  the  "laws of  nature"  we usually mean
things like gravitation, or heredity, or the laws of chemistry. But when the
older thinkers called the Law  of Right and Wrong "the Law  of Nature," they
really meant the Law of Human Nature.  The idea was that, just as all bodies
are  governed by the law of gravitation and organisms by biological laws, so
the creature  called man also had his law-with this great difference, that a
body could not choose whether it obeyed the law of gravitation or not, but a
man could choose either to obey the Law of Human Nature or to disobey it.
     We  may put this in another way. Each  man is at every moment subjected
to  several different sets of law but there is only one of these which he is
free to  disobey. As  a  body,  he is subjected to  gravitation  and  cannot
disobey it; if  you leave  him unsupported in mid-air, he has no more choice
about falling than a stone has. As an organism, he  is subjected  to various
biological laws  which he  cannot disobey any more than an  animal can. That
is, he cannot  disobey those laws which he shares with other things; but the
law which is peculiar to  his human nature, the law  he does not share  with
animals or vegetables or inorganic  things, is the  one he can disobey if he
chooses.
     This law was called the Law of Nature because people thought that every
one knew it by nature and  did  not need to be taught it. They did not mean,
of course, that you might not find an odd individual here and there who  did
not  know it, just as you find a few  people who are colour-blind or have no
ear for a tune. But  taking the race as a whole, they thought that the human
idea of decent behaviour  was  obvious to every one. And I believe they were
right. If they  were  not, then all the things  we  said about the war  were
nonsense.  What was  the sense in saying the enemy were in the  wrong unless
Right  is a  real thing which the Nazis at bottom knew as well as we did and
ought to have practised? If they had had no notion of what we mean by right,
then, though we might still have  had  to fight them,  we could no more have
blamed them for that than for the colour of their hair.
     I  know that  some  people  say the idea of a Law  of  Nature or decent
behaviour known to all men is unsound, because different  civilisations  and
different ages have had quite different moralities.
     But  this  is  not  true.  There have  been differences  between  their
moralities,  but  these  have  never  amounted  to  anything  like  a  total
difference. If anyone  will take the  trouble to compare the  moral teaching
of, say, the ancient Egyptians,  Babylonians,  Hindus,  Chinese, Greeks  and
Romans, what will really  strike him will be how very like they  are to each
other  and to our own. Some of the evidence for this I have put together  in
the appendix of  another  book  called  The Abolition of  Man; but  for  our
present purpose I need only ask the reader to think what a totally different
morality  would  mean. Think  of  a country  where  people were admired  for
running away in battle, or where a man felt proud of double-crossing all the
people who had been kindest to him. You might  just as well try to imagine a
country  where  two  and  two made five. Men  have differed  as regards what
people you ought to be unselfish to-whether it was only your own  family, or
your  fellow  countrymen, or everyone. But  they have always agreed that you
ought  not to  put yourself  first. Selfishness has never been  admired. Men
have differed as to whether you should have one wife or four. But they  have
always agreed that you must not simply have any woman you liked.
     But the most remarkable thing is this. Whenever you find a man who says
he  does not believe in a real Right  and  Wrong, you will find the same man
going back on this a moment later.  He  may break his promise to you, but if
you try breaking one to  him he  will be complaining "It's  not fair" before
you  can say Jack Robinson. A  nation may  say treaties  do  not matter, but
then,  next minute, they  spoil  their case  by saying that  the  particular
treaty they want to break was an unfair one.  But if treaties do not matter,
and if there is  no such thing  as Right and Wrong- in other words, if there
is  no Law of Nature-what  is  the difference between a fair treaty  and  an
unfair  one? Have they not let  the  cat out  of  the bag  and  shown  that,
whatever they say, they really know the Law of Nature just like anyone else?
     It seems,  then,  we are forced to  believe in a real Right  and Wrong.
People may  be sometimes mistaken about them,  just as people sometimes  get
their sums wrong;  but they are not  a matter of mere taste and  opinion any
more than the multiplication table. Now if we are agreed about that, I go on
to my next point, which is  this. None of us are  really keeping the Law  of
Nature. If there are any exceptions among you, I apologise to them. They had
much better read some  other work, for nothing I am  going  to say  concerns
them. And now, turning to the ordinary human beings who are left:
     I  hope  you will not  misunderstand what I am going to  say.  I am not
preaching, and Heaven knows I do not pretend  to be better than anyone else.
I  am only  trying to call attention to a fact; the fact that this year,  or
this  month, or,  more likely, this very day, we  have  failed  to  practise
ourselves  the kind of  behaviour we expect from other people.  There may be
all sorts of excuses for us. That time you  were so unfair  to the  children
was  when  you were  very  tired. That  slightly  shady business  about  the
money-the one you have almost forgotten-came when you were very hard up. And
what you  promised to do for  old  So-and-so and  have  never done-well, you
never would have promised  if  you had known how frightfully busy  you  were
going to  be. And as for  your behaviour to your wife (or husband) or sister
(or brother) if I knew how irritating they could  be, I would  not wonder at
it-and who the dickens am I, anyway? I am just the same.  That is  to say, I
do not succeed in keeping the Law of Nature very well, and the moment anyone
tells me I am not keeping it, there starts up in my mind a string of excuses
as long as your arm. The question at the moment is not whether they are good
excuses. The point is that they are one more proof of how deeply, whether we
like it or  not, we  believe in the Law of Nature. If we  do not  believe in
decent behaviour, why should we be so anxious to make excuses for not having
behaved decently? The truth is, we believe in  decency  so much-we  feel the
Rule or Law pressing on us so- that we cannot bear  to face the fact that we
are breaking  it,  and consequently we try to shift the  responsibility. For
you  notice that  it is  only  for our bad behaviour  that we find all these
explanations. It is only our bad  temper that we  put down to being tired or
worried or hungry; we put our good temper down to ourselves.
     These, then,  are the two points  I wanted to  make. First, that  human
beings, all over the earth, have this curious idea that they ought to behave
in  a certain way, and cannot  really get rid of it. Secondly,  that they do
not in fact behave in that way. They know the Law  of Nature; they break it.
These two facts are the foundation of all clear thinking about ourselves and
the universe we live in.
2. Some Objections
     If they are  the foundation, I had better  stop to make that foundation
firm before I go  on. Some  of the letters I have had show-that a  good many
people  find it difficult to understand just what this Law of Human  Nature,
or Moral Law, or Rule of Decent Behaviour is.
     For example, some people wrote to me saying,  "Isn't  what you call the
Moral Law simply  our herd instinct and  hasn't it been developed  just like
all  our other  instincts?" Now  I  do  not  deny that  we  may have a  herd
instinct: but that is not what I  mean by the Moral Law. We all know what it
feels like to be prompted by instinct-by mother love, or sexual instinct, or
the instinct for food. It means that you feel a strong want or desire to act
in a certain way.  And,  of  course, we  sometimes do feel just that sort of
desire to  help another person:  and no doubt that desire is due to the herd
instinct. But feeling a desire to help is quite different  from feeling that
you ought to help  whether you want  to or not. Supposing you hear a cry for
help from a man in danger. You  will probably feel two  desires-one a desire
to give help (due to your herd instinct), the other  a desire to keep out of
danger (due to the instinct for self-preservation). But you will find inside
you, in addition to these two  impulses, a  third thing which tells you that
you ought to follow the  impulse to help, and suppress  the  impulse  to run
away. Now this thing  that judges between  two instincts, that decides which
should be encouraged, cannot itself be either of them. You might as well say
that the sheet of music which tells you, at a given moment, to play one note
on  the piano and not another, is  itself  one of the notes on the keyboard.
The Moral Law tells us  the tune we have to  play: our instincts are  merely
the keys.
     Another  way of  seeing  that the  Moral Law is not simply  one of  our
instincts is this. If two instincts are in conflict, and there is nothing in
a creature's mind except those two instincts, obviously the stronger  of the
two must win. But at  those moments  when we are most conscious of the Moral
Law, it usually seems to be telling us  to  side with the weaker  of the two
impulses. You probably want  to be safe much more  than you want to help the
man who is drowning: but  the Moral Law tells you to help  him all the same.
And surely it often tells us to try to  make the right impulse stronger than
it naturally is? I mean, we often  feel  it  our duty to  stimulate the herd
instinct, by waking up our imaginations  and arousing our pity and so on, so
as to get up enough steam for doing the  right thing. But clearly we are not
acting from instinct  when we set about making an instinct stronger  than it
is. The thing that says to you,  "Your herd instinct is asleep. Wake it up,"
cannot  itself be the herd instinct. The thing  that tells you which note on
the piano needs to be played louder cannot itself be that note.
     Here  is  a  third way  of seeing  it If the  Moral Law was one  of our
instincts, we ought to be able to point to some one impulse inside us  which
was always what we call "good,"  always  in agreement with the rule of right
behaviour. But you cannot. There is none of our impulses which the Moral Law
may not sometimes tell  us to suppress, and none which it may  not sometimes
tell  us to encourage. It is  a mistake  to think that some of our impulses-
say mother love or patriotism-are good, and others, like sex or the fighting
instinct, are bad. All we mean is that  the occasions  on which the fighting
instinct or the sexual desire need to be restrained are rather more frequent
than  those  for  restraining  mother  love  or patriotism.  But  there  are
situations in which it is the duty  of a married man to encourage his sexual
impulse and of a soldier to encourage  the fighting instinct. There are also
occasions on which a mother's love for her own children or  a man's love for
his  own country  have to  be  suppressed or  they  will  lead to unfairness
towards other people's children or  countries. Strictly speaking,  there are
no such things as good and bad impulses. Think once again of a piano. It has
not got two kinds of  notes on it,  the "right" notes and the  "wrong" ones.
Every single note is right at one time  and wrong  at another. The Moral Law
is not any one instinct or any set of instincts: it is something which makes
a kind of tune (the tune we call goodness or right conduct) by directing the
instincts.
     By the  way,  this point  is of great  practical consequence. The  most
dangerous thing you can do is to take any one impulse of your own nature and
set it up as the thing you ought to follow at all costs. There is not one of
them  which will not  make  us  into devils if we  set it  up as an absolute
guide. You might think love of humanity in general was safe,  but it is not.
If you leave out  justice  you  will  find yourself breaking agreements  and
faking evidence in trials "for the  sake of humanity," and become in the end
a cruel and treacherous man.
     Other  people wrote to me  saying, "Isn't  what you call the Moral  Law
just  a  social convention, something that is  put into us  by education?" I
think there is a misunderstanding here. The people who ask that question are
usually taking it for granted  that if we have learned  a thing from parents
and teachers,  then  that thing must be merely  a  human invention. But,  of
course, that is not so. We all learned the multiplication table at school. A
child who grew  up alone on a desert island would not know it. But surely it
does not follow that the multiplication table is simply a  human convention,
something human  beings have  made up for  themselves and  might  have  made
different if they had  liked? I fully agree that we learn the Rule of Decent
Behaviour  from parents  and teachers,  and  friends and books,  as we learn
everything else. But some of the things we learn are  mere conventions which
might have been  different-we  learn to keep to the left of the road, but it
might just  as  well  have been the rule to keep to the right-and  others of
them, like mathematics,  are real truths. The question is to which class the
Law of Human Nature belongs.
     There  are  two  reasons for  saying it belongs to the  same  class  as
mathematics. The first is, as I said in the first chapter, that though there
are differences between the moral ideas of one time or country and those  of
another, the differences  are not  really very great-not nearly so  great as
most people imagine-and you can recognise  the same law running through them
all: whereas  mere conventions,  like  the  rule of the road or the kind  of
clothes  people  wear, may differ to  any extent. The other reason  is this.
When you think about these differences between  the morality  of  one people
and another, do you think that the morality of one  people is ever better or
worse than that of  another? Have any of  the changes been improvements?  If
not, then of course there could never be  any moral progress. Progress means
not just  changing, but changing for the better.  If  no set of  moral ideas
were truer or better  than any other, there would be no sense in  preferring
civilised  morality  to  savage  morality,  or  Christian  morality to  Nazi
morality. In  fact,  of course, we  all do believe that some  moralities are
better  than  others. We do believe  that some  of the people  who  tried to
change the moral ideas of their own age were what we would call Reformers or
Pioneers-people  who understood  morality  better than their neighbours did.
Very well then. The moment you say that one set of moral ideas can be better
than  another, you  are, in fact,  measuring them both by a standard, saying
that one of them conforms to  that standard more nearly  than the other. But
the standard that measures two things  is  something  different from either.
You  are, in fact, comparing them  both with  some  Real Morality, admitting
that there is such a  thing  as a real  Right,  independent  of what  people
think, and that some  people's  ideas  get nearer  to  that real Right  than
others. Or put it this way. If your moral ideas can be truer,  and those  of
the Nazis less true, there must  be something-some Real Morality-for them to
be true  about. The  reason why your idea  of New York can be truer or  less
true than  mine is that New York is a real  place, existing quite apart from
what either of us thinks. If  when  each of  us said "New  York" each  meant
merely "The town I am  imagining in my own head,"  how could one of  us have
truer ideas than the other? There would be no question of truth or falsehood
at all.  In the  same way, if  the Rule of  Decent  Behaviour  meant  simply
"whatever each nation happens to approve," there would be no sense in saying
that any  one nation had  ever been  more  correct in its  approval than any
other; no sense  in saying  that the world could ever grow morally better or
morally worse.
     I conclude then, that  though the differences between people's ideas of
Decent Behaviour often make you suspect that there is no real natural Law of
Behaviour at  all,  yet the  things  we  are  bound  to  think  about  these
differences really prove just the opposite. But  one  word before I  end.  I
have  met  people  who  exaggerate  the  differences, because they  have not
distinguished  between  differences of  morality and differences  of  belief
about  facts. For example, one  man said  to  me, "Three  hundred  years ago
people in England were putting witches to death.  Was that what you call the
Rule of Human  Nature or Right Conduct?"  But  surely  the reason we do  not
execute  witches is  that  we  do  not believe there are such  things. If we
did-if  we really thought that there  were people going about  who had  sold
themselves  to the devil and received supernatural powers from him in return
and were using  these powers to kill their neighbours or drive  them mad  or
bring bad weather,  surely we  would all agree that  if  anyone deserved the
death penalty, then these filthy quislings did.  There  is  no difference of
moral principle here: the difference is simply about  matter of fact. It may
be a great advance in knowledge not to believe in witches: there is no moral
advance in  not  executing them  when you  do  not think they are there. You
would not call a  man humane  for ceasing  to  set  mousetraps if  he did so
because he believed there were no mice in the house.
3. The Reality of the Law
     I now  go  back to  what I  said at the end  of the first chapter, that
there  were two odd things  about  the human  race. First,  that  they  were
haunted by the idea of a sort of behaviour they ought  to practise, what you
might call fair play, or decency, or morality, or the Law of Nature. Second,
that they did not in fact do so.  Now  some of you  may  wonder why I called
this  odd. It  may  seem  to you  the most  natural  thing  in the world. In
particular, you may have thought I was rather  hard on the human race. After
all, you  may  say, what  I call breaking the Law  of Right  and Wrong or of
Nature, only means that people are  not perfect.  And why  on earth should I
expect them to be? That would be a good answer if what  I was  trying to  do
was to fix the exact amount of blame which is due to us for not behaving  as
we  expect  others to behave.  But  that  is not  my  job at  all. I am  not
concerned at present  with  blame; I am trying  to find out  truth. And from
that point  of view the very  idea  of something being imperfect, of its not
being what it ought to be, has certain consequences.
     If you take a thing  like a stone or a tree, it is what it is and there
seems no sense in saying it ought to have  been otherwise. Of course you may
say a stone is  "the wrong  shape" if  you want to use it for a  rockery, or
that a tree is a bad tree because it does not give  you as much shade as you
expected. But all you  mean is that the  stone or tree does not happen to be
convenient for  some purpose of  your own.  You  are not,  except as a joke,
blaming  them for that. You  really  know, that,  given the weather  and the
soil, the tree could not have been any different. What we, from our point of
view, call a "bad" tree is obeying  the laws of its nature just as much as a
"good" one.
     Now have you noticed what follows? It follows that what we usually call
the  laws  of nature-the  way  weather works on a tree for  example-may  not
really be laws  in  the strict sense, but only in a manner of speaking. When
you say that  falling stones always obey the law of gravitation, is not this
much the same as saying that the law only means "what stones always do"? You
do not really think that when a stone is  let go, it suddenly remembers that
it is under orders to fall to  the  ground.  You only mean that, in fact, it
does fall.  In other  words, you  cannot be sure that there is anything over
and  above the facts  themselves, any  law about  what  ought to happen,  as
distinct from what does happen. The laws  of nature, as applied to stones or
trees, may  only mean "what Nature, in fact, does."  But if  you turn to the
Law of Human Nature, the  Law of Decent Behaviour, it is a different matter.
That law certainly does not mean "what  human beings, in fact, do"; for as I
said before, many of them do not obey this law at all, and none of them obey
it completely. The law of gravity tells you what stones do if you drop them;
but  the Law of Human Nature tells you what human beings  ought to do and do
not. In  other words, when you are dealing with humans, something else comes
in above and beyond the actual facts. You have the facts (how men do behave)
and you also have something else (how  they ought to behave). In the rest of
the  universe  there  need not  be  anything but the  facts.  Electrons  and
molecules behave in a certain way,  and certain results follow, and that may
be the whole story. (*) But  men behave in a certain way and that is not the
whole  story,  for  all  the  time  you  know  that  they  ought  to  behave
differently.
     ----
     [*] I do not think it is the whole story, as you will see later. I mean
that, as far ax the argument has gone up to date, it may be.
     ----
     Now this is really so peculiar that one is tempted to try to explain it
away. For instance, we might try to  make out that when you say  a man ought
not  to act as he does, you only mean the same  as when you say that a stone
is the wrong shape; namely, that what he is doing happens to be inconvenient
to you. But  that  is simply untrue. A man occupying the  corner seat in the
train because he got there first, and  a  man who slipped  into it  while my
back was  turned and removed  my bag, are both equally  inconvenient. But  I
blame the  second  man and  do  not blame  the first. I am not  angry-except
perhaps for a moment  before I come to my senses-with  a man who trips me up
by accident; I am angry with a man who tries to trip me up  even  if he does
not succeed. Yet the first has hurt me and the second has not. Sometimes the
behaviour  which I  call bad is not inconvenient to me  at all, but the very
opposite. In  war,  each  side may  find a  traitor  on the other side  very
useful. But though they use him and pay him they regard him as human vermin.
So you cannot say that what we call decent behaviour in others is simply the
behaviour that happens to  be useful to us. And  as for decent  behaviour in
ourselves,  I  suppose  it  is  pretty obvious  that it does  not  mean  the
behaviour  that  pays.  It means  things  like  being  content  with  thirty
shillings when you might have got three pounds,  doing school  work honestly
when it would be easy to cheat,  leaving a girl alone when you would like to
make love to  her, staying in  dangerous places when you could  go somewhere
safer, keeping promises  you would rather not  keep, and  telling  the truth
even when it makes you look a fool.
     Some people say that though decent conduct does not mean what pays each
particular  person  at a particular  moment,  still,  it means what pays the
human race as a whole; and that consequently there  is no mystery about  it.
Human beings, after all, have some sense; they see that you cannot have real
safety or happiness except in a  society  where every one plays fair, and it
is because  they see this that  they try to behave decently. Now, of course,
it  is  perfectly  true  that  safety  and  happiness  can  only  come  from
individuals, classes, and  nations being honest and fair  and  kind  to each
other. It  is  one  of  the  most important truths in  the world.  But as an
explanation of why we feel as we do about Right and Wrong it just misses the
point If we ask: "Why ought I to be unselfish?" and you reply "Because it is
good for society," we may  then  ask, "Why  should  I  care what's  good for
society except when it happens to pay me personally?" and then you will have
to say, "Because  you ought to  be unselfish"-which simply brings us back to
where we started. You are  saying what is true, but you are  not getting any
further. If a man asked what was the point of playing football, it would not
be much good saying "in order to  score goals," for trying to score goals is
the game itself, not  the reason for the game, and you would really  only be
saying that football was football-which is true,  but not worth  saying.  In
the same way, if a man asks what is the point of behaving decently, it is no
good replying, "in order to benefit society," for trying to benefit society,
in  other words  being unselfish (for "society" after all only  means "other
people"), is one of the  things  decent behaviour consists in; all  you  are
really saying is that decent behaviour  is  decent behaviour. You would have
said just  as much if you had stopped at  the  statement, "Men  ought to  be
unselfish."
     And that  is  where  I do stop. Men ought to be unselfish,  ought to be
fair. Not  that men are  unselfish, nor that  they like being unselfish, but
that  they ought to be. The Moral Law, or Law of Human Nature, is not simply
a fact about human behaviour in the same way  as the Law of  Gravitation is,
or may be, simply  a fact about how heavy objects behave. On the other hand,
it  is not a mere fancy, for we cannot get rid of the idea, and most  of the
things we say  and think about men would be reduced  to  nonsense if we did.
And it is not simply a statement about how we should like men  to behave for
our own convenience; for the behaviour we call bad or  unfair is not exactly
the  same  as the  behaviour  we  find  inconvenient, and  may  even  be the
opposite. Consequently,  this  Rule  of Right and  Wrong,  or  Law  of Human
Nature, or whatever you  call  it, must somehow or other be a  real thing- a
thing  that is  really there, not made up by  ourselves. And yet it is not a
fact in the ordinary sense, in the  same way as  our  actual  behaviour is a
fact. It begins to look as if we shall have to admit that there is more than
one kind of reality; that, in this particular case, there is something above
and beyond the  ordinary facts of men's  behaviour, and yet quite definitely
real-a real law, which none of as made, but which we find pressing on us.
4. What Lies Behind the Law
     Let  us sum up what we have reached so far.  In the  case of stones and
trees  and  things of that sort, what we call  the Laws of Nature may not be
anything except a way of speaking. When  you say that nature is  governed by
certain laws,  this may only  mean that nature does, in  fact, behave  in  a
certain way. The so-called laws may not  be anything real-anything above and
beyond the  actual facts  which we observe. But in  the case of Man, we  saw
that this will not do. The Law of  Human Nature, or of Right and Wrong, must
be something above and beyond the actual facts of human behaviour.  In  this
case, besides  the actual facts, you have something else-a real law which we
did not invent and which we know we ought to obey.
     I  now want  to consider what this tells us about  the universe we live
in. Ever since men were  able to think,  they have been wondering what  this
universe really is and how it came to be there. And, very roughly, two views
have been held. First, there  is what is called the materialist view. People
who  take that  view  think that matter and space just happen  to exist, and
always  have  existed, nobody  knows why; and that the  matter,  behaving in
certain  fixed ways,  has just  happened,  by a  sort of fluke,  to  produce
creatures like ourselves who are able to think. By one chance in a  thousand
something  hit  our sun  and  made it  produce  the planets;  and by another
thousandth  chance   the  chemicals  necessary   for  life,  and  the  right
temperature, occurred on one of these planets, and so some of  the matter on
this earth  came  alive; and  then, by  a  very  long series of chances, the
living  creatures  developed into  things  like us.  The  other view  is the
religious view. (*) According to it, what is  behind the  universe  is  more
like a mind than it is like anything else we know.
     ----
     [*] See Note at the end of this chapter.
     ----
     That  is to say, it is  conscious, and has  purposes, and  prefers  one
thing to another. And on this view it made the universe, partly for purposes
we do not know, but partly, at any rate, in order to  produce creatures like
itself-I  mean,  like  itself  to  the extent of having minds. Please do not
think that  one of  these views was held a  long time ago and that the other
has gradually taken  its place. Wherever there have  been  thinking men both
views turn up. And note  this  too.  You  cannot find  out which view is the
right one by science in the ordinary sense. Science works by experiments. It
watches  how things behave.  Every  scientific  statement in  the  long run,
however complicated  it  looks, really means  something like, "I pointed the
telescope  to such and such a part of the  sky at 2:20  A.M. on January 15th
and saw so-and-so," or, "I put some of this stuff in  a pot and heated it to
such-and-such  a temperature and it did so-and-so." Do not think I am saying
anything  against science:  I am only saying what its  job is.  And the more
scientific a man is, the more (I believe) he would agree with  me that  this
is  the job of science- and  a very useful and necessary  job it is too. But
why anything comes to be there at  all, and whether there is anything behind
the things  science  observes-something of a  different  kind-this is not  a
scientific question. If there is  "Something  Behind," then  either it  will
have to remain altogether unknown to  men or else make itself  known in some
different way. The statement that there is any such thing, and the statement
that there is no such thing, are neither of them statements that science can
make. And  real  scientists do not usually  make them.  It  is  usually  the
journalists and popular novelists who have picked  up a few odds and ends of
half-baked science  from textbooks  who go in  for them.  After  all, it  is
really  a matter of common sense. Supposing science ever became  complete so
that it knew every single thing in  the whole universe. Is it not plain that
the questions, "Why is there  a  universe?" "Why  does it go on as it does?"
"Has it any meaning?" would remain just as they were?
     Now the position would be quite  hopeless  but  for this. There is  one
thing, and  only one, in the whole universe which we know more about than we
could  learn from external  observation. That  one  thing  is Man. We do not
merely  observe men, we  are men. In this case we have, so to speak,  inside
information; we are in the know. And because of that,  we know that men find
themselves  under  a moral law, which they  did  not make, and  cannot quite
forget even when  they try, and  which they know they ought  to obey. Notice
the  following  point. Anyone  studying Man  from the  outside as  we  study
electricity or  cabbages, not knowing our language and consequently not able
to get any inside knowledge from us, but merely observing what we did, would
never get the slightest evidence that  we  had this moral law. How could he?
for his observations would only show what we did, and the moral law is about
what we ought to do. In the same way, if there were anything above or behind
the observed  facts  in the case of  stones  or the weather, we, by studying
them from outside, could never hope to discover it.
     The position of  the question, then,  is like  this.  We want  to  know
whether  the  universe  simply happens to  be what  it  is for no reason  or
whether  there  is a power behind  it that makes  it what it is.  Since that
power, if it exists, would be not one  of the  observed facts but  a reality
which  makes them, no  mere observation of the facts  can find it. There  is
only one case in which we can know  whether  there is anything  more, namely
our own case. And in that one case we find there is. Or put it the other way
round. If there was  a controlling power outside the universe, it could  not
show itself to us as one of the  facts inside the universe- no more than the
architect  of a house could actually be a wall or  staircase or fireplace in
that house. The only way in which we could expect it to show itself would be
inside ourselves as an influence or a command trying to get us  to behave in
a  certain  way.  And that is just what we do  find inside ourselves. Surely
this ought to arouse our  suspicions? In the  only case where you can expect
to  get an answer, the answer turns out to be Yes;  and in  the other cases,
where you do not  get an answer, you see why you  do  not.  Suppose  someone
asked  me, when  I see a man in a blue uniform going down the street leaving
little paper packets at each house, why I suppose that they contain letters?
I should reply, "Because whenever he leaves a similar little packet for me I
find it does  contain a letter." And if he then objected, "But you've  never
seen all  these letters  which you think the other  people  are  getting," I
should say, "Of course not, and I shouldn't expect to,  because  they're not
addressed to me. I'm  explaining the packets I'm  not allowed to open by the
ones I am allowed to open." It  is the  same  about this  question. The only
packet I am allowed  to open is Man.  When I do, especially when I open that
particular man called Myself, I find  that I do not  exist on my own, that I
am  under a law; that somebody or something wants me  to behave in a certain
way. I do not, of course, think that if I could get inside a stone or a tree
I should find exactly the same thing, just as I do not  think all the  other
people in the  street get the  same letters as I  do.  I  should expect, for
instance, to find that the stone had to obey the law of gravity-that whereas
the  sender of the letters  merely  tells  me to obey the  law  of  my human
nature, He  compels  the stone to obey the laws of its  stony nature. But  I
should expect to find  that there was,  so to speak, a sender  of letters in
both cases, a Power behind the facts, a Director, a Guide.
     Do not think I am going faster than I really am. I  am not yet within a
hundred  miles of  the  God of Christian theology. All  I  have  got to is a
Something which is  directing the universe, and which appears in me as a law
urging me  to do right and making me feel responsible and uncomfortable when
I do wrong. I think we have to assume it is more like a mind than it is like
anything  else  we know-because  after all the  only  other thing we know is
matter and you can hardly imagine a bit of matter  giving instructions. But,
of course, it need not be very like a mind, still less like a person. In the
next chapter we shall see if we can find out anything more about it. But one
word of warning. There has been  a  great deal of soft soap talked about God
for the last hundred years. That is not what I am  offering. You can cut all
that out.
     Note -In order to keep this  section short enough when it was given  on
the  air,  I mentioned only the Materialist view and the Religious view. But
to  be  complete I ought  to  mention the In between view called  Life-Force
philosophy,  or  Creative  Evolution,  or Emergent  Evolution. The  wittiest
expositions of it come in the works  of Bernard Shaw,  but the most profound
ones in those  of  Bergson. People  who hold  this  view say that  the small
variations  by which life on this planet  "evolved" from the lowest forms to
Man were not due to chance  but to the  "striving" or "purposiveness"  of  a
Life-Force. When people say this we must ask them whether by Life-Force they
mean something  with a mind  or not. If they do, then  "a mind bringing life
into existence and leading it to perfection" is really a God, and their view
is thus identical with the Religious. If they do not, then what is the sense
in saying  that something without a mind "strives"  or  has "purposes"? This
seems to me fatal to their view. One  reason why  many people find  Creative
Evolution so attractive  is that it gives one much of  the emotional comfort
of believing in God and none of the less pleasant consequences. When you are
feeling fit and the sun is shining and you do  not  want to believe that the
whole universe is a mere mechanical dance of atoms, it is nice to be able to
think of  this great  mysterious Force rolling on through  the centuries and
carrying you on its  crest. If,  on the other hand, you want to do something
rather shabby, the Life-Force, being only a blind force,  with no morals and
no mind, will never interfere with you like that troublesome  God we learned
about when we were children. The Life-Force is a  sort of tame  God. You can
switch it on when you want, but it will  not bother you.  All the thrills of
religion and none of the cost. Is the Life-Force the greatest achievement of
wishful thinking the world has yet seen?
5. We Have Cause to Be Uneasy
     I ended my last chapter with the idea that in the Moral Law somebody or
something from  beyond the material universe was actually getting at us. And
I expect when I reached that point some of you felt a certain annoyance. You
may  even  have thought  that I had  played  a trick on you-that I  had been
carefully wrapping up to look like  philosophy what turns out to be one more
"religious jaw." You may have felt you were ready to listen to me as long as
you  thought  I  had anything  new to say;  but if it  turns out to be  only
religion, well, the world has tried that and you cannot put the clock  back.
If anyone is feeling that way I should like to say three things to him.
     First, as to putting the clock  back. Would you think I was joking if I
said that you can put a  clock back, and that if the  clock is  wrong it  is
often a very sensible thing to do?  But I  would rather  get away from  that
whole idea  of clocks. We  all want  progress.  But  progress  means getting
nearer to the  place where you want to  be. And  if you  have  taken a wrong
turning, then to go forward does not  get you any nearer. If you are  on the
wrong road, progress means doing an about turn and walking back to the right
road;  and  in  that  case  the  man who  turns  back  soonest  is  the most
progressive man. We have all  seen this when doing arithmetic. When  I  have
started a sum the wrong way,  the sooner I admit this and go back and  start
over again,  the faster I shall get on. There  is nothing progressive  about
being pigheaded  and refusing to admit a mistake. And I think if you look at
the  present state of the world, it  is  pretty plain that humanity has been
making some big  mistake. We are on  the  wrong road. And if  that is so, we
must go back. Going back is the quickest way on.
     Then, secondly, this has not yet turned exactly into a "religious jaw."
We have not yet got as far as the God of any actual religion, still less the
God of that particular religion called Christianity. We have only got as far
as a Somebody or Something behind the  Moral Law. We are not taking anything
from the Bible or the  Churches, we are trying to see  what we can  find out
about this Somebody on our own steam. And I want to make it quite clear that
what  we find out on our own  steam  is something that gives us a shock.  We
have  two  bits  of evidence about  the Somebody. One is the universe He has
made. If  we  used  that as our  only clue, then I  think we should  have to
conclude  that He was a  great artist  (for the universe is a very beautiful
place),  but  also that He is quite merciless  and no friend to man (for the
universe is a  very dangerous  and  terrifying  place).  The  other  bit  of
evidence is that Moral  Law which He  has put  into our minds. And this is a
better bit of evidence than the other, because it is inside information. You
find out more about God from the Moral Law than from the universe in general
just as you find out more about a man by listening to his conversation  than
by looking at a house he has built. Now, from this second bit of evidence we
conclude that the Being behind the universe is intensely interested in right
conduct -in  fair  play,  unselfishness,  courage,  good faith, honesty  and
truthfulness.  In  that  sense  we  should agree with the  account given  by
Christianity and some other religions, that God is "good." But do not let us
go too fast here. The Moral Law does not give  us any  grounds for  thinking
that God is "good" in the sense of being indulgent, or soft, or sympathetic.
There is nothing indulgent about the  Moral Law. It is as  hard as nails. It
tells you to do the straight thing and it does not seem to care how painful,
or dangerous,  or difficult it is to do. If God  is like the Moral Law, then
He is not soft. It is no use, at this stage, saying that what  you mean by a
"good"  God is  a God who  can forgive.  You  are going too quickly. Only  a
Person can forgive. And we have not yet got as far as a personal God-only as
far as a power, behind the Moral Law, and more  like a mind than it is  like
anything  else. But  it  may  still be very  unlike a Person.  If it is pure
impersonal mind, there may be no  tense in asking it  to make allowances for
you  or let you off, just as there is no sense in  asking the multiplication
table to let you off when  you do your sums wrong.  You are bound to get the
wrong answer. And it is no use either saying that if there is a God of  that
sort-an  impersonal  absolute goodness-then  you do not like Him and are not
going to bother about Him. For the trouble is that one part of you is on His
side and really agrees with  His disapproval of human greed and trickery and
exploitation. You may want Him to make an exception in your own case, to let
you off  this one time; but you know at bottom  that unless the power behind
the  world really  and unalterably detests that sort of behaviour,  then  He
cannot be  good. On  the other hand, we  know  that  if there does exist  an
absolute goodness  it must hate most of what we do. That is the terrible fix
we are in. If the universe is not governed by an absolute goodness, then all
our efforts are in the long run hopeless. But  if it is, then we  are making
ourselves  enemies  to  that  goodness every day, and are not  in  the least
likely to do  any  better tomorrow,  and  so our  case is hopeless again. We
cannot do without it. and we cannot do with it. God  is the only comfort, He
is also the  supreme terror:  the thing we  most need and  the thing we most
want to hide from. He is our only possible-ally, and we  have made ourselves
His enemies. Some people talk  as  if  meeting the gaze of absolute goodness
would be  fun.  They need to think  again. They are  still only playing with
religion. Goodness is either the great safety or  the great danger-according
to the way you react to it.  And we have reacted the wrong way. Now my third
point. When I  chose to get to my real subject in this roundabout way, I was
not trying to play any kind of  trick  on you. I had  a different reason. My
reason was that Christianity simply does not make sense until you have faced
the  sort  of  facts  I have  been describing.  Christianity tells people to
repent and promises them forgiveness. It therefore has  nothing (as far as I
know) to say to people who do not know they  have done anything to repent of
and  who do  not feel that they need any forgiveness.  It is after you  have
realised  that there is a real  Moral Law, and a  Power  behind the law, and
that you have  broken  that law and put yourself wrong with that Power-it is
after all this,  and not a moment sooner, that  Christianity begins to talk.
When you  know you are sick, you will listen, to. the doctor.  When you have
realised that our position is nearly  desperate you will begin to understand
what the Christians are talking about. They offer  an explanation of how  we
got into our present state of both hating goodness and loving it. They offer
an explanation of  how  God  can be this impersonal mind  at the back of the
Moral Law and yet also a  Person. They tell you how the demands of this law,
which you and I cannot meet,  have been met  on  our behalf, how God Himself
becomes a man to save man from the disapproval  of God. It  is an old  story
and if you want to go into it you will no doubt consult people who have more
authority to talk  about it than I  have. All I am doing is to ask people to
face  the  facts-to understand  the  questions which Christianity  claims to
answer. And  they are very  terrifying facts. I wish it  was possible to say
something  more agreeable. But  I must say what I think  true. Of course,  I
quite agree  that the  Christian religion is,  in  the long run, a  thing of
unspeakable comfort. But it  does not  begin  in comfort; it begins  in  the
dismay  I have been describing, and it is no use at  all trying to go  on to
that comfort without first going through that dismay. In religion, as in war
and everything else, comfort is the one  thing you cannot get by looking for
it. If you look for truth, you may find comfort in the end: if you look  for
comfort you will not get either comfort or truth- only soft soap and wishful
thinking to  begin with and, in the end,  despair. Most of us  have got over
the prewar wishful thinking about international politics. It is time we  did
the same about religion.
     I have  been asked to  tell you what Christians believe, and I am going
to begin by telling you one thing that Christians do not need to believe. If
you  are a Christian you do not have to believe that all the other religions
are simply wrong  all through.  If you are an atheist you do have to believe
that  the main point in all the religions of the whole  world  is simply one
huge mistake. If you are a Christian,  you  are free to think that all these
religions, even the queerest ones, contain at least  some hint of the truth.
When I was an atheist I had to try to persuade myself that most of the human
race have always been wrong about  the question that  mattered to them most;
when I became a Christian I was able to take  a  more liberal view. But,  of
course, being a Christian does mean thinking that where Christianity differs
from other  religions,  Christianity  is  right  and they are wrong.  As  in
arithmetic-there  is  only one right  answer to a sum, and all other answers
are wrong: but some of the wrong answers  are much  nearer being right  than
others.
     The first big division of humanity is into the majority, who believe in
some  kind  of  God  or gods,  and  the minority  who do not. On this point,
Christianity  lines up  with  the  majority-lines up with ancient Greeks and
Romans,  modern  savages, Stoics,  Platonists,  Hindus,  Mohammedans,  etc.,
against the modern Western European materialist.
     Now I go on to the next big division. People who all believe in God can
be divided according to  the sort of God they believe in. There are two very
different ideas on this subject One  of them is  the idea  that He is beyond
good and evil.  We humans  call  one thing  good and  another thing bad. But
according to  some  people  that  is merely our  human point of  view. These
people would say  that the wiser you become the less you would want  to call
anything good or bad, and the more dearly you would  see that everything  is
good in  one  way and  bad  in  another,  and  that  nothing could have been
different.  Consequently,  these  people  think  that long  before  you  got
anywhere  near   the  divine  point  of  view  the  distinction  would  have
disappeared  altogether. We call a  cancer bad, they would  say, because  it
kills a  man;  but  you might  just as  well call  a successful surgeon  bad
because he kills  a cancer. It all depends  on the point of  view. The other
and  opposite idea is that God is quite  definitely "good" or "righteous." a
God who takes sides, who loves love and hates hatred, who wants us to behave
in one way and not in another.  The first of these views-the one that thinks
God  beyond  good and evil-is called  Pantheism.  It  was held by the  great
Prussian philosopher Hagel  and, as  far as I  can understand  them, by  the
Hindus. The other view is held by Jews, Mohammedans and Christians.
     And  with this big difference between Pantheism and  the Christian idea
of God, there usually  goes another. Pantheists usually believe that God, so
to speak, animates  the universe as you animate your body: that the universe
almost is God, so  that if it  did  not exist He would not exist either, and
anything you find  in the  universe is  a part of God. The Christian idea is
quite  different.  They think God invented  and made the universe-like a man
making a  picture or composing a  tune. A painter  is not a picture, and  he
does not die if his picture is destroyed. You may say,  "He's  put  a lot of
himself into  it,"  but you only mean  that all  its beauty and interest has
come  out of his head. His skill is not in the picture in  the same way that
it is in  his head, or even in his hands. expect you see how this difference
between Pantheists and  Christians hangs together with the other one. If you
do not take the  distinction between good and bad very seriously, then it is
easy to  say that anything you find in this world is a part of God. But,  of
course, if you think some things really bad, and  God  really good, then you
cannot talk like that. You must believe that God is separate  from the world
and  that  some  of  the  things  we see  in it are  contrary  to His  will.
Confronted with a cancer or a slum the Pantheist can say, "If you could only
see it from the  divine  point of view, you  would realise that this also is
God." The Christian replies, "Don't talk damned nonsense." (*)
     ----
     [*] One listener complained  of  the word damned as frivolous swearing.
But I mean exactly what I say-nonsense that is  damned is under God's curse,
and will (apart  from  God's grace) lead  those who  believe it  to  eternal
death.
     ----
     For  Christianity is  a  fighting  religion. It  thinks  God  made  the
world-that space and time, heat  and cold,  and  all the colours and tastes,
and all the animals and vegetables, are things that God "made up out  of His
head" as a man makes up a story. But it also thinks that a great many things
have gone  wrong  with  the  world that  God made and that  God insists, and
insists very loudly, on our putting them right again.
     And, of course, that raises a very big question. If a good God made the
world why has  it gone wrong? And for many years I simply  refused to listen
to the Christian  answers  to  this  question,  because  I  kept on  feeling
"whatever you say,  and however clever your  arguments are,  isn't  it  much
simpler  and  easier to  say that the  world was not made by any intelligent
power? Aren't  all your arguments simply a complicated attempt to  avoid the
obvious?" But then that threw me back into another difficulty.
     My argument  against  God  was  that  the universe seemed so cruel  and
unjust. But how had I got this idea of just and unjust? A man does  not call
a  line  crooked  unless he  has  some  idea of a straight line.  What was I
comparing this universe with when I called it unjust? If  the whole show was
bad and senseless from A to Z, so  to  speak, why did I, who was supposed to
be part of the show, find myself in such violent reaction against  it? A man
feels  wet  when he falls into water,  because man is not a  water animal: a
fish would not feel wet.
     Of course I could have  given up my  idea of justice by  saying it  was
nothing but  a  private idea of my own. But  if I did that, then my argument
against  God collapsed too- for  the argument  depended on  saying that  the
world  was really unjust, not simply  that  it  did not happen to  please my
private fancies. Thus in the very act  of trying to  prove  that God did not
exist-in other words, that the whole of reality was senseless-I  found I was
forced to assume that one part of reality-namely my idea of justice-was full
of sense.
     Consequently atheism turns  out to be too simple. If the whole universe
has no meaning,  we should never have found out that it has no meaning: just
as, if there were no light in the universe and therefore no  creatures  with
eyes, we should never know it was dark. Dark would be without meaning.
2. The Invasion
     Very well then, atheism is too simple. And I will tell you another view
that is also too  simple.  It is the view I call Christianity-and-water, the
view  which simply says there is a good God in Heaven and everything is  all
right-leaving  out all  the difficult and  terrible  doctrines about sin and
hell and the devil, and the redemption. Both these are boys' philosophies.
     It  is no good asking for a simple religion. After all, real things are
not simple. They  look simple, but they are not.  The table I  am sitting at
looks simple: but ask a  scientist to tell you what it is really made of-all
about the atoms and how the light waves rebound from them and hit my eye and
what they do to the optic nerve and what it does to my brain-and, of course,
you find that what  we  call "seeing  a table" lands you  in  mysteries  and
complications  which  you can hardly  get to  the end of. A  child saying  a
child's prayer looks simple.  And if you are content to stop there, well and
good. But if you are  not-and the modern world usually is not-if you want to
go on  and ask  what  is really  happening-  then you  must  be prepared for
something difficult. If  we ask  for something  more than simplicity,  it is
silly then to complain that the something more is not simple.
     Very often, however, this silly procedure is adopted  by people who are
not  silly,  but  who,  consciously  or   unconsciously,   want  to  destroy
Christianity. Such  people  put up a  version of Christianity suitable for a
child  of six and make that  the  object of  their  attack. When you  try to
explain the Christian doctrine as it is really held by an  instructed adult,
they then complain that you are making their heads turn round and that it is
all too  complicated  and that if there really were  a God they are sure  He
would have made "religion" simple, because simplicity  is so beautiful, etc.
You must be  on  your guard  against these people for they will change their
ground every minute and only waste your tune. Notice, too, their idea of God
"making religion simple": as if "religion" were something  God invented, and
not His  statement to us of certain  quite unalterable facts  about His  own
nature.
     Besides  being complicated, reality, in  my experience, is usually odd.
It is not  neat,  not obvious, not what you expect. For instance,  when  you
have grasped that the earth and the other planets all  go round the sun, you
would naturally expect that all the planets were made  to match-all at equal
distances from each other, say,  or  distances that regularly increased,  or
all the same size, or else getting bigger or smaller as you go  farther from
the sun. In fact, you find no rhyme or reason (that we can see) about either
the sizes or  the distances; and  some of them  have one moon, one has four,
one has two, some have none, and one has a ring.
     Reality, in fact, is usually something you could not have guessed. That
is one of the reasons I believe Christianity. It is a religion you could not
have  guessed. If it  offered us  just  the kind  of universe we had  always
expected,  I should feel we were making it up. But, in fact, it is  not  the
sort of thing anyone would have  made up. It has just that queer twist about
it  that  real  things  have.  So  let  us  leave  behind  all  these  boys'
philosophies-these over-simple answers. The problem is  not  simple and  the
answer is not going to be simpler either.
     What  is the  problem? A universe that contains much that  is obviously
bad and apparently meaningless, but containing creatures like  ourselves who
know that it is bad and  meaningless. There are only two views that face all
the facts. One is the Christian view that this is a good world that has gone
wrong, but still retains the memory of what it ought to have been. The other
is  the view  called  Dualism.  Dualism means the belief that there are  two
equal and independent powers at the back of everything, one of them good and
the other bad, and that this universe is the battlefield in which they fight
out an endless war. I personally think that next  to Christianity Dualism is
the manliest and most sensible creed  on the market. But it  has  a catch in
it.
     The two powers, or  spirits, or gods-the good  one  and the bad one-are
supposed  to  be quite  independent. They  both  existed from all  eternity.
Neither of  them made the other, neither of them has any more right than the
other to  call itself God. Each  presumably thinks it is good and thinks the
other  bad. One of them  likes hatred and cruelty, the  other likes love and
mercy, and  each backs its own view. Now what do we mean when we call one of
them the Good Power and the other the Bad Power? Either we are merely saying
that  we  happen to  prefer  the  one  to  the other-like preferring beer to
cider-or else we are saying that,  whatever the two  powers  think about it,
and  whichever we humans,  at the moment,,  happen to like,  one of them  is
actually wrong, actually  mistaken, in  regarding itself as good. Now it  we
mean merely that we happen to prefer the first, then we must give up talking
about good and evil at  all.  For good means what you  ought to prefer quite
regardless of what you happen to like  at any given moment.  If "being good"
meant  simply  joining the  side you happened to  fancy, for no real reason,
then good would not deserve to be called good. So we  must  mean that one of
the two powers is actually wrong and the other actually right
     But the moment you say that, you are putting  into the universe a third
thing  in addition to the two Powers: some  law or standard or rule of  good
which one of the powers conforms  to and the  other fails to conform to. But
since the two powers are judged by this standard, then this standard, or the
Being who made this  standard, is  farther back and higher up than either of
them, and He will be the real God.  In  fact, what we meant  by calling them
good and bad turns out to be that one of them is  in a right relation to the
real ultimate God and the other in a wrong relation to Him.
     The same point can be made in a different way. If Dualism is true, then
the bad Power must  be a being who likes  badness for  its  own sake. But in
reality we have no experience  of anyone liking  badness just because  it is
bad. The nearest we can get to it is in cruelty. But in real life people are
cruel for one  of two reasons- either  because  they  are  sadists, that is,
because they have a sexual perversion which makes cruelty a cause of sensual
pleasure  to  them, or else for the sake of something  they are going to get
out of it-money, or power, or safety. But pleasure, money, power, and safety
are  all, as  far as they go, good things. The  badness consists in pursuing
them by  the wrong method, or  in the wrong way, or too much. I do not mean,
of course, that the people who do this are not desperately wicked. I do mean
that wickedness, when you examine  it, turns  out to  be the pursuit of some
good  in  the wrong way. You can be good for the mere sake of goodness:  you
cannot be bad for the mere sake of badness. You can do  a  kind  action when
you are not feeling  kind and when it gives you no pleasure, simply  because
kindness is right; but no one ever did a cruel action simply because cruelty
is  wrong-only because cruelty was pleasant or useful to him. In other words
badness cannot succeed even in being bad  in the same  way in which goodness
is good. Goodness is, so to speak, itself: badness is only spoiled goodness.
And  there must be something good first before it can be  spoiled. We called
sadism  a  sexual perversion;  but you must first have the idea of a  normal
sexuality  before you can talk of its being perverted; and you can see which
is the perversion, because  you  can explain  the perverted from the normal,
and cannot explain the normal  from the perverted. It follows that this  Bad
Power, who is supposed to be on an equal footing with the Good Power, and to
love badness  in the same  way as  the Good Power loves goodness, is a  mere
bogy. In order to be bad he must have good things to want and then to pursue
in the wrong way: he  must have impulses which were originally good in order
to be able to pervert them. But if he is bad he cannot supply himself either
with good  things to  desire or with good  impulses to pervert.  He  must be
getting both from the Good  Power. And if so, then he is not independent. He
is part  of the Good Power's world: he was made either  by the Good Power or
by some power above them both.
     Put  it  more  simply  still.  To  be  bad,  he  must  exist  and  have
intelligence  and   will.  But  existence,  intelligence  and  will  are  in
themselves good. Therefore he must be getting them from the Good Power: even
to be bad he must borrow or steal from his opponent. And do you now begin to
see why Christianity has always said that the devil is a fallen angel?  That
is not a mere story  for the children. It is a real recognition of  the fact
that evil is a parasite, not an original thing. The powers which enable evil
to carry on are powers given it by goodness. All  the things which  enable a
bad man to  be  effectively  bad  are in themselves  good things-resolution,
cleverness, good  looks, existence  itself. That is why Dualism, in a strict
sense, will not work.
     But  I  freely  admit  that   real  Christianity  (as   distinct   from
Christianity-and-water)  goes much nearer  to Dualism than people think. One
of the  things  that  surprised  me when  I  first  read  the  New Testament
seriously was that it talked so  much about  a Dark  Power in the universe-a
mighty evil spirit who was held to be the  Power behind  death  and disease,
and  sin.  The difference  is that Christianity thinks  this Dark Power  was
created  by  God, and  was  good  when  he  was  created,  and  went  wrong.
Christianity agrees with Dualism that this universe is at  war. But  it does
not think this is a war between  independent powers. It thinks it is a civil
war,  a rebellion, and that we are living in a part of the universe occupied
by the rebel.
     Enemy-occupied  territory-that is what this world  is.  Christianity is
the  story  of  how the rightful king has  landed,  you might say  landed in
disguise,  and  is  calling  us  all to  take part in a  great  campaign  of
sabotage. When you  go to church you  are  really listening-in to the secret
wireless from our friends: that is why the enemy is so anxious to prevent us
from  going. He  does  it  by  playing  on  our  conceit  and  laziness  and
intellectual snobbery.  I know someone will ask me, "Do you really  mean, at
this  time  of day,  to reintroduce our old friend the devil-hoofs and horns
and all?" Well, what the time of  day has to do with it I do not know. And I
am not particular about the hoofs and horns. But in other respects my answer
is  "Yes,  I  do."  I do  not  claim  to know  anything  about  his personal
appearance. If anybody really wants  to know  him better I would say to that
person, "Don't worry. If you really want to, you will Whether you'll like it
when you do is another question."
3. The Shocking Alternative
     Christians,  then, believe that an evil power  has made himself for the
present the Prince of this World.  And, of course, that  raises problems. Is
this state of affairs in  accordance with God's will or not? If it is, He is
a  strange God, you  will say: and if  it  is not, how can  anything  happen
contrary to the will of a being with absolute power?
     But  anyone who  has  been  in authority  knows how a thing  can  be in
accordance with  your will in  one  way and not  in another. It may be quite
sensible for a mother  to say to the children, "I'm not going to go and make
you tidy the schoolroom every night. You've got to learn to keep  it tidy on
your own." Then she goes up one  night  and finds the Teddy bear and the ink
and the French Grammar all lying in the grate. That is against her will. She
would prefer the children to be tidy. But on the  other hand, it is her will
which has left the children free to be untidy. The same thing  arises in any
regiment, or trade union, or  school. You make a  thing  voluntary  and then
half the people do not do it. That is not what you willed, but your will has
made it possible.
     It  is probably the same in the  universe. God created things which had
free  will. That means creatures  which can  go either  wrong or right. Some
people  think  they  can  imagine  a  creature which  was  free but  had  no
possibility of going wrong; I cannot. If a  thing is free to  be  good it is
also  free to  be bad. And free will  is  what  has made evil possible. Why,
then, did God give them free will?  Because  free  will though it makes evil
possible, is also the only thing that makes possible any love or goodness or
joy worth  having.  A  world  of  automata-of  creatures  that  worked  like
machines-would hardly be worth creating. The happiness which God designs for
His higher creatures is the happiness of being freely, voluntarily united to
Him and to each other in an ecstasy of love and delight  compared with which
the most rapturous love between a man and a woman on this earth is mere milk
and water. And for that they must be free.
     Of  course God knew  what would happen if  they used their  freedom the
wrong way: apparently He thought it worth the risk. Perhaps we feel inclined
to disagree with Him. But there is  a difficulty about disagreeing with God.
He is the source from which all your reasoning power comes: you could not be
right and He  wrong any more  than  a  stream can  rise higher than its  own
source. When you are  arguing  against Him you  are arguing against the very
power that makes you able to argue at all: it is like cutting off the branch
you are sitting on. If God thinks  this state of war in the universe a price
worth  paying  for  free  will-that  is, for making  a  live world in  which
creatures  can do real  good  or  harm  and something of real importance can
happen,  instead  of  a  toy  world  which  only moves  when  He  pulls  the
strings-then we may take it it is worth paying.
     When we have understood about free will,  we shall see  how silly it is
to ask, as somebody  once asked  me:  "Why  did  God make a creature of such
rotten stuff that it went wrong?" The better stuff a creature is made of-the
cleverer and stronger and freer it is-then  the better it will be if it goes
right, but also the worse it will be if it goes  wrong. A cow cannot be very
good or very  bad; a dog can be both better  and worse;  a  child better and
worse still; an ordinary man, still more so; a man of genius, still more so;
a superhuman spirit best-or worst-of all.
     How  did the Dark  Power go wrong? Here, no doubt, we ask a question to
which human  beings cannot give an answer with  any  certainty. A reasonable
(and traditional) guess, based on  our own experiences of  going wrong, can,
however, be  offered.  The  moment  you have a  self  at  all,  there  is  a
possibility of putting Yourself first-wanting to be the centre-wanting to be
God,  in fact. That was the sin of Satan: and that was the sin he taught the
human race. Some people think the fall of man had something to do with  sex,
but  that is a mistake. (The story in the Book  of Genesis  rather  suggests
that  some corruption in our  sexual nature  followed  the fall and  was its
result,  not  its  cause.)  What  Satan put  into  the  heads of  our remote
ancestors was the idea that they could  "be like gods"-could set up on their
own as if they had created  themselves-be their own masters-invent some sort
of happiness  for themselves outside  God, apart  from God.  And out of that
hopeless  attempt has  come nearly  all  that we  call  human history-money,
poverty, ambition, war,  prostitution,  classes, empires,  slavery-the  long
terrible story  of man trying to find something  other  than  God which will
make him happy.
     The reason why  it can never succeed  is this. God made us: invented us
as a man  invents an engine.  A car is made to run on gasoline, and it would
not run properly on anything else. Now God designed the human machine to run
on Himself. He Himself is the fuel our spirits were designed to burn, or the
food our spirits were designed to feed on. There is no other. That is why it
is just no good asking God to make us happy in our own way without bothering
about religion. God cannot give us a happiness and peace apart from Himself,
because it is not there. There is no such thing.
     That is the key to  history.  Terrific energy is expended-civilisations
are  built up-excellent  institutions devised; but each time  something goes
wrong. Some fatal flaw always brings the selfish and cruel people to the top
and it all slides back  into misery and ruin. In fact, the machine conks. It
seems to start up  all right and runs a  Jew yards, and then it breaks down.
They are trying to run it on the wrong juice. That is what Satan has done to
us humans.
     And what  did God do? First  of all He left us conscience, the sense of
right and wrong: and all through history there have been people trying (some
of them very hard) to obey it. None of them ever  quite succeeded. Secondly,
He sent  the human race what I call good dreams: I mean those  queer stories
scattered all through the heathen religions  about a god who  dies and comes
to life again and, by his death, has somehow given new life to men. Thirdly,
He selected one particular people and spent several centuries hammering into
their  heads the sort of God He was -that there was only one of Him and that
He  cared about  right  conduct. Those  people  were the  Jews, and the  Old
Testament gives an account of the hammering process.
     Then comes  the real shock. Among these Jews there  suddenly turns up a
man  who goes about talking as if He was God. He claims to forgive sins.  He
says He has always existed. He says He is  coming to judge the world at  the
end of  time. Now let us get this clear. Among Pantheists, like the Indians,
anyone  might say that he was a part of God, or one with God: there would be
nothing  very odd about it. But this man, since He was a Jew, could not mean
that kind of God. God, in their language, meant the  Being outside the world
Who had made it and was  infinitely  different from anything else.  And when
you have  grasped that,  you will  see that what  this man  said was,  quite
simply, the most shocking thing that has ever been uttered by human lips.
     One  part  of the claim tends to slip past us unnoticed because we have
heard it so often that we no longer see what it amounts to. I mean the claim
to forgive sins: any sins. Now unless the speaker is God,  this is really so
preposterous as to  be  comic.  We can all  understand  how  a  man forgives
offences  against himself. You  tread on my toe and I forgive you, you steal
my  money  and  I forgive  you.  But  what should we make of a  man, himself
unrobbed and untrodden on, who announced that he forgave you for treading on
other  men's  toes and  stealing  other  men's money? Asinine fatuity is the
kindest description  we  should give  of his conduct. Yet this is what Jesus
did.  He  told people  that  their sins  were forgiven,  and never waited to
consult  all the other people  whom their sins had  undoubtedly injured.  He
unhesitatingly behaved as if He was  the party chiefly concerned, the person
chiefly offended in all offences. This makes sense only if He really was the
God  whose laws are broken and whose  love is wounded in  every sin. In  the
mouth of any speaker who is not God, these words would imply what I can only
regard as  a  silliness and  conceit unrivalled  by  any  other character in
history.
     Yet (and this is the strange, significant thing) even His enemies, when
they read  the Gospels, do not usually  get the impression  of silliness and
conceit. Still less do unprejudiced readers. Christ says that He  is "humble
and meek" and we  believe Him; not noticing that, if  He were merely  a man,
humility  and meekness are the very last characteristics we could  attribute
to some of His sayings.
     I am trying here to prevent anyone saying the really foolish thing that
people often say about Him: "I'm ready to  accept  Jesus  as a  great  moral
teacher, but I don't accept His claim to be  God." That is  the one thing we
must not say. A man who was merely a  man and said the sort of things  Jesus
said would not be a  great moral teacher.  He would either be a lunatic-on a
level  with the man  who says he is a poached egg-or  else  he would  be the
Devil of Hell. You must make your  choice.  Either this man was, and is, the
Son of God: or else a madman or something worse. You can shut Him  up for  a
fool, you can spit at  Him and kill Him as  a demon; or you  can fall at His
feet and  call Him Lord  and God. But let us not come  with  any patronising
nonsense about His being a great human teacher. He has not left that open to
us. He did not intend to.
4. The Perfect Penitent
     We are faced, then, with  a  frightening alternative. This  man  we are
talking  about either  was (and  is) just what He said or else a lunatic, or
something worse. Now it seems to me  obvious  that He was neither a  lunatic
nor a fiend:  and consequently, however strange or terrifying or unlikely it
may seem, I have  to accept the view  that He was and is God. God has landed
on this enemy-occupied world in human form.
     And now, what was the purpose of  it all? What did He come to do? Well,
to teach, of  course; but as soon as you look into the  New Testament or any
other  Christian writing  you  will  find they are constantly  talking about
something different-about  His  death and  His coming  to life  again. It is
obvious  that  Christians think the chief point of the story lies here. They
think the main thing He came to earth to do was to suffer and be killed.
     Now before  I  became a Christian I was  under  the impression that the
first thing Christians had  to believe was one particular theory as  to what
the point of this  dying was. According to that  theory God wanted to punish
men for having  deserted and  joined the Great Rebel, but Christ volunteered
to be punished instead, and so  God let us off.  Now  I admit that even this
theory  does not seem to me quite so immoral and so silly as it used to; but
that is not the point  I want  to make. What I came to see later on was that
neither  this theory  nor any  other  is Christianity. The central Christian
belief is that Christ's death has somehow put us right with God and given us
a fresh start Theories as to how it did this are another matter. A good many
different theories have  been held as to  how it  works; what all Christians
are agreed on is that it does work. I will tell you what I think it is like.
All sensible people know that if you are tired and hungry a meal will do you
good. But  the  modern theory  of  nourishment-all  about  the  vitamins and
proteins-is a different thing. People ate their dinners and felt better long
before  the theory  of  vitamins was ever  heard of:  and  if the  theory of
vitamins is some day abandoned they will go on eating their dinners just the
same.  Theories  about   Christ's  death  are  not  Christianity:  they  are
explanations  about how it works.  Christians would not all agree as  to how
important these theories  are. My own  church-the Church of England-does not
lay down any one of  them as  the right one.  The Church  of Rome goes a bit
further. But I think they will all agree that the thing itself is infinitely
more important than any explanations that theologians have produced. I think
they would probably admit that no explanation will ever be quite adequate to
the reality. But as I said in the preface  to this book, I am only a layman,
and at  this point we are getting into  deep water. I can only tell you, for
what it is worth, how I, personally, look at the matter.
     On  my view the theories are not themselves the thing  you are asked to
accept. Many of you no doubt have read Jeans or Eddington. What they do when
they want to explain the atom,  or something of that sort, is  to give you a
description  out of which you can make a mental picture. But then  they warn
you that this picture is  not what the scientists actually believe. What the
scientists believe is a mathematical formula. The pictures are there only to
help you to understand the formula. They are not  really true in the way the
formula is; they  do not give you the real thing but only something more  or
less like it. They are  only meant to help, and if they do  not help you can
drop them. The thing itself  cannot  be pictured, it  can only  be expressed
mathematically. We are in  the same boat here. We believe that the  death of
Christ  is  just  that  point  in  history  at  which  something  absolutely
unimaginable from outside shows through into our own world. And if we cannot
picture even the atoms of which our own world is built, of course we are not
going to be able to picture this. Indeed, if  we  found that  we could fully
understand  it,  that  very fact would show it was not what it professes  to
be-the inconceivable, the uncreated, the thing from  beyond nature, striking
down into nature  like lightning. You  may ask what good will it be to us if
we  do not understand  it.  But that  is easily answered. A man  can eat his
dinner without  understanding  exactly  how  food  nourishes  him. A man can
accept what  Christ  has  done without  knowing  how  it  works: indeed,  he
certainly would not know how it works until he has accepted it.
     We  are told that Christ was  killed for us, that His death  has washed
out  our sins,  and  that by  dying  He  disabled  death itself. That is the
formula. That is Christianity. That is what has to be believed. Any theories
we build up as  to how  Christ's death did all  this are, in my view,  quite
secondary: mere  plans or diagrams to  be left alone if they do not help us,
and, even if they do help us, not to  be confused with the thing itself. All
the same, some of these theories are worth looking at.
     The one most people have  heard is the one I mentioned before -the  one
about our being let  off because Christ had volunteered to bear a punishment
instead of us. Now on the face of it that is a very silly theory. If God was
prepared  to  let us off,  why on earth did He not do so? And what  possible
point  could there be  in punishing an innocent person instead? None  at all
that I can see, if you are thinking of punishment in the police-court sense.
On  the other hand, if you think  of a debt,  there is plenty of  point in a
person who has some assets paying it on behalf of someone who has not. Or if
you take "paying the penalty," not in the  sense of  being punished, but  in
the more general sense of "standing the racket" or "footing the bill," then,
of course, it is a matter of common experience that, when one person has got
himself into a  hole, the trouble of getting him out usually falls on a kind
friend. Now what  was the sort  of "hole" man had  got  himself into? He had
tried to set up on his own, to behave as if he belonged to himself. In other
words, fallen man is not simply an imperfect creature who needs improvement:
he  is  a  rebel  who  must lay  down  his  arms.  Laying  down  your  arms,
surrendering, saying you  are  sorry,  realising  that you have  been on the
wrong track  and  getting ready to  start  life  over again from the  ground
floor-that is the only  way out of a  "hole." This process of surrender-this
movement  full  speed  astern-is   what   Christians  call  repentance.  Now
repentance is  no fun at all. It is something much harder than merely eating
humble  pie. It means unlearning  all the self-conceit and self-will that we
have been training ourselves into for thousands  of years. It means  killing
part of yourself, undergoing a kind of death. In fact, it needs  a good  man
to repent. And here comes the catch. Only a bad person needs to repent: only
a good person  can repent perfectly.  The worse you are the more you need it
and the less you can  do it. The only person who could do it perfectly would
be a perfect person-and he would not need it.
     Remember, this repentance, this willing submission to humiliation and a
kind  of death, is not something God demands of you  before He will take you
back and which He could let  you off if He chose: it is simply a description
of what going back to Him is  like. If you ask God to take you  back without
it, you are really  asking  Him  to let you go  back without going back.  It
cannot hap pen. Very well,  then,  we  must go through with it. But the same
badness which makes us need  it, makes us unable to do it. Can we  do it  if
God helps us? Yes, but what do we mean  when  we talk of God helping us?  We
mean God putting into us a bit of Himself, so to speak. He lends us a little
of His reasoning powers and that  is how we think: He puts  a little  of His
love  into  us and that is how  we  love one another. When you teach a child
writing, you hold its hand while it forms the letters: that is, it forms the
letters  because you are forming them. We love  and reason because God loves
and  reasons and holds  our hand while we  do it.  Now if we had not fallen,
that would be all plain sailing. But unfortunately we now need God's help in
order to do  something which God, in His own  nature,  never does  at all-to
surrender, to suffer, to submit, to die. Nothing in God's nature corresponds
to this  process at  all.  So that the one road for  which we now need God's
leadership most of  all is a  road God, in His own nature, has never walked.
God can share only what He has: this thing, in His own nature, He has not.
     But supposing God became  a  man-suppose  our  human  nature which  can
suffer and  die  was amalgamated  with God's  nature in one person-then that
person  could help us. He could surrender  His  will, and  suffer  and  die,
because He was man; and He could do it perfectly because He was God. You and
I can go through this process only if  God does it in us; but  God can do it
only if He becomes  man. Our attempts at this dying  will succeed only if we
men  share in God's dying, just as our thinking can  succeed only because it
is a drop out of  the ocean of His  intelligence: but we cannot share  God's
dying unless God dies; and He cannot die  except by being a man. That is the
sense in which He pays our debt, and suffers for us what He Himself need not
suffer at all.
     I have heard some people complain that if Jesus was God as well as man,
then His sufferings and death lose all value in their eyes, "because it must
have been so easy for him." Others may (very rightly) rebuke the ingratitude
and   ungraciousness   of   this   objection;  what   staggers   me  is  the
misunderstanding it betrays. In one sense, of  course, those who make it are
right.  They  have even understated their own  case. The perfect submission,
the  perfect  suffering, the perfect  death  were not  only  easier to Jesus
because He was God,  but were  possible only because He  was God. But surely
that is  a very odd reason for not  accepting them?  The  teacher is able to
form the letters for the child because the teacher is grown-up and knows how
to write. That, of course, makes it easier for the teacher, and only because
it is easier for him can he help the child. If it rejected him because "it's
easy for grown-ups" and waited to learn writing from another child who could
not write  itself (and so  had  no "unfair" advantage), it would not get  on
very  quickly. If I am  drowning in a rapid  river,  a man who still has one
foot on the bank may give me  a hand which saves my  life. Ought  I to shout
back  (between my gasps) "No, it's not  fair! You have  an advantage! You're
keeping one  foot  on  the bank"? That  advantage-call  it "unfair"  if  you
like-is the  only reason  why  he can be of any use to me. To what  will you
look for help if you will not look to that which is stronger than yourself?
     Such  is my own way of looking at  what Christians call the  Atonement.
But remember this is only one more picture. Do not  mistake it for the thing
itself: and if it does not help you, drop it
5. The Practical Conclusion
     The perfect surrender and humiliation were undergone by Christ: perfect
because He was God,  surrender and humiliation  because He  was man. Now the
Christian belief is  that if  we somehow share the humility and suffering of
Christ we shall also  share  in His conquest for death and find  a new  life
after we have died and in it become perfect, and perfectly happy, creatures.
This  means something much  more  than our trying  to  follow  His teaching.
People often  ask  when  the  next step  in evolution-the  step to something
beyond  man-will happen. But on the Christian view, it has happened already.
In Christ a  new kind of man appeared: and the new  kind of life which began
in  Him is to be put into us. How is  this to be  done? Now, please remember
how we acquired  the old,  ordinary kind of life. We derived it from others,
from our father and mother and all our ancestors, without our consent-and by
a very curious process, involving pleasure, pain, and danger. A  process you
would  never have guessed. Most of us  spend a good many  years in childhood
trying  to guess it: and  some children,  when they  are  first told, do not
believe it-and  I am not sure that I blame them, for it is very odd. Now the
God who arranged that process is the same God who arranges  how the new kind
of life-the Christ life-is  to be spread. We must be  prepared  for it being
odd too. He did not consult us when He invented sex: He has not consulted us
either when He invented this.
     There  are three  things  that spread the  Christ life to us:  baptism,
belief,  and that  mysterious  action  which different  Christians  call  by
different names-Holy Communion, the Mass, the Lord's Supper. At least, those
are  the  three ordinary methods. I  am  not saying there may not be special
cases where it is spread without one or more of these. I have not time to go
into special  cases, and I do not  know enough.  If you are trying  in a few
minutes to tell a man how to get  to Edinburgh you will tell him the trains:
he can,  it  is true, get  there by boat or by a plane, but you  will hardly
bring  that  in. And I  am not saying  anything  about which  of these three
things is the most essential. My Methodist friend would like  me to say more
about belief  and less (in proportion) about  the other  two.  But I am  not
going into  that. Anyone who professes to teach you Christian doctrine will,
in fact, tell you  to  use all  three,  and that  is enough for  our present
purpose.
     I cannot myself  see why these things should be the conductors  of  the
new kind of life. But then, if  one did not happen to  know,  I should never
have  seen any  connection between a particular  physical  pleasure  and the
appearance of  a new human being in the world. We have to take reality as it
comes to us: there is  no good  jabbering about what it ought  to be like or
what we should have expected it  to be like. But  though I cannot see why it
should be so, I can tell you why I believe it is  so. I have explained why I
have to  believe that Jesus was (and is) God. And it seems plain as a matter
of history that He  taught His followers that the new  life was communicated
in this way. In other words, I believe it on His authority. Do not be scared
by the  word authority. Believing  things on authority  only means believing
them  because  you have been told  them by  someone you  think  trustworthy.
Ninety-nine per cent of the things you believe  are believed on authority. I
believe  there is  such  a place as New  York. I have not seen it  myself. I
could not prove by abstract  reasoning that there must  be such a  place.  I
believe it  because  reliable  people  have  told me  so.  The ordinary  man
believes  in the Solar System, atoms, evolution, and  the circulation of the
blood on authority-because the scientists say so. Every historical statement
in the  world  is  believed  on  authority.  None of  us has seen the Norman
Conquest  or the defeat of the Armada. None of us could prove  them by  pure
logic  as  you prove a thing in mathematics. We  believe them simply because
people who did see them have left writings that tell us about them: in fact,
on authority. A man who jibbed at authority in  other things as  some people
do in religion would have to be content to know nothing all his life.
     Do not think I am setting up baptism and belief  and the Holy Communion
as things that will do instead of your  own attempts  to  copy  Christ. Your
natural  life  is derived from your parents; that does not mean it will stay
there if you do nothing  about it. You can  lose it by neglect,  or you  can
drive it  away by committing suicide. You have to feed it and look after it:
but always remember  you are not  making it,  you are only keeping up a life
you  got from  someone  else.  In  the same  way  a  Christian can lose  the
Christ-life which has been  put into him, and he has to make efforts to keep
it.  But  even the best Christian that ever lived is not acting  on  his own
steam-he  is only nourishing  or  protecting  a  life  he could  never  have
acquired by his own efforts. And that has practical consequences. As long as
the  natural  life is in your  body, it will do a lot towards repairing that
body. Cut it, and up to a  point  it will heal, as a dead body would  not. A
live body is not one that never gets hurt, but  one that  can to some extent
repair  itself. In  the same  way a Christian is  not a  man who never  goes
wrong, but a man who is enabled to repent and pick himself up and begin over
again  after each  stumble-because the Christ-life  is inside him, repairing
him  all the  time, enabling  him  to repeat  (in  some degree) the  kind of
voluntary death which Christ Himself carried out.
     That is why  the Christian is in a different position from other people
who are trying  to be good. They hope, by being good, to please God if there
is one; or-if they think there is not-at least they hope to deserve approval
from  good men.  But the Christian  thinks any good he does  comes from  the
Christ-life inside  him.  He does not think God will love  us because we are
good, but that God  will make us good  because He loves us; just as the roof
of a greenhouse does not attract the sun because  it is bright, but  becomes
bright because the sun shines on it.
     And let me make it quite clear that when Christians say the Christ-life
is  in  them,  they do not mean  simply something mental or moral. When they
speak of  being "in Christ" or of Christ being "in them," this is not simply
a  way of saying  that  they are  thinking about Christ or copying Him. They
mean that Christ is actually operating  through them; that the whole mass of
Christians are the physical organism  through which Christ acts-that we are.
His fingers and muscles, the  cells of His  body. And  perhaps that explains
one  or two things. It explains why  this  new  life is spread  not only  by
purely  mental acts  like  belief, but by bodily acts like baptism and  Holy
Communion.  It  is  not merely the  spreading of an idea;  it  is  more like
evolution-a biological or super-biological fact. There is no good trying  to
be more  spiritual than God.  God never meant man  to  be a purely spiritual
creature. That is why He uses material things like bread and wine to put the
new life into us. We may think this rather  crude and unspiritual.  God does
not: He invented eating. He likes matter. He invented it.
     Here is  another  thing that used to  puzzle me. Is it not  frightfully
unfair that this new life should be  confined  to  people who  have heard of
Christ and been able to believe in Him? But the truth is God has not told us
what His arrangements about the other people are. We do know that no man can
be saved except through Christ; we do not know that only those who  know Him
can be saved through Him,  But in the meantime, if you are worried about the
people outside, the most unreasonable thing you can  do is to remain outside
yourself. Christians are Christ's body, the organism through which He works.
Every addition  to that  body enables  Him  to do more. If you want to  help
those outside you  must add your own  little cell to  the body of Christ who
alone can  help them. Cutting  off  a man's fingers would  be an  odd way of
getting him to do more work.
     Another  possible  objection  is  this. Why  is  God  landing  in  this
enemy-occupied  world in disguise  and starting a  sort of secret society to
undermine the devil? Why is He not landing in force, invading it? Is it dial
He  is not strong enough?  Well,  Christians think  He is going to  land  in
force; we do not know when. But we can guess why He is delaying. He wants to
give us the chance of joining His side  freely. I do  not  suppose you and I
would  have  thought  much of a Frenchman who  waited  till the Allies  were
marching  into Germany  and then announced  he was on  our  side.  God  will
invade.  But  I wonder whether  people  who ask  God to interfere openly and
directly in our world  quite realise what it will be like when He does. When
that happens,  it is  the end  of the world. When the author walks on to the
stage  the play is over.  God is going to invade, all right: but what is the
good  of saying  you are on  His side  then, when  you see the whole natural
universe melting away  like a dream and  something  else-something  it never
entered your head  to conceive-comes crashing in;  something so beautiful to
some of us  and so terrible to others that  none  of us will have any choice
left?  For  this  time  it  will  be  God  without  disguise;  something  so
overwhelming that  it will  strike either irresistible love  or irresistible
horror into every creature. It  will be too  late then to choose your  side.
There is no use saying you choose to lie down when it  has become impossible
to  stand  up. That will  not be the time for choosing: it will  be the time
when we  discover  which side we really have  chosen, whether we realised it
before or  not. Now, today, this moment,  is our chance to choose the  right
side. God is holding back to give us that chance. It will not last for ever.
We must take it or leave it.
     There is a story about a  schoolboy  who was asked what he  thought God
was like. He replied that, as far as he could make out, God was "The sort of
person who is always snooping round to see if anyone is enjoying himself and
then trying to stop it." And I am  afraid that is the sort of idea  that the
word  Morality  raises  in  a  good  many  people's  minds:  something  that
interferes, something that stops you having a good time.  In  reality, moral
rules  are  directions for running the human machine.  Every  moral  rule is
there to prevent a breakdown, or a strain, or a  friction, in the running of
that  machine. That  is why  these  rules at  first  seem to  be  constantly
interfering with our natural inclinations. When you are  being taught how to
use any  machine,  the  instructor keeps on saying,  "No, don't do  it  like
that," because, of course, there are all sorts of things that look all right
and seem to you the natural way  of treating the machine, but do not  really
work.
     Some people prefer to talk about moral "ideals" rather than moral rules
and  about  moral  "idealism" rather  than  moral  obedience. Now it  is, of
course, quite true that  moral perfection is an "ideal" in the sense that we
cannot achieve it. In that sense every kind of perfection is, for us humans,
an ideal; we cannot succeed in  being perfect car  drivers or perfect tennis
players or in drawing perfectly  straight  lines. But there is another sense
in which it is very misleading to call moral perfection an ideal. When a man
says that a certain  woman, or  house, or ship, or garden  is "his ideal" he
does not mean (unless he  is rather a fool) that everyone else ought to have
the same  ideal. In such  matters we are entitled  to have different  tastes
and, therefore, different ideals. But it is dangerous to describe a  man who
tries  very hard to  keep the moral law as a  "man of  high ideals," because
this might lead you to think  that  moral perfection was  a private taste of
his own  and that the rest of us were not called on to  share it. This would
be a disastrous mistake. Perfect behaviour may be as unattainable as perfect
gear-changing when we  drive; but it is a necessary ideal prescribed for all
men by the very nature of the human machine just as perfect gear-changing is
an ideal prescribed for all drivers by the very nature of cars. And it would
be  even  more  dangerous  to think of oneself as a person "of high  ideals"
because one is trying to tell no lies at all (instead of only a few lies) or
never to commit adultery (instead of committing it only seldom) or not to be
a  bully (instead  of  being  only a moderate bully). It  might lead  you to
become a prig and to  think you were rather a special person who deserved to
be congratulated on his "idealism." In reality you might just as well expect
to  be congratulated because, whenever you do a sum, you try to get it quite
right. To be sure, perfect arithmetic is "an ideal"; you will certainly make
some mistakes in  some calculations.  But there  is nothing very fine  about
trying  to be quite accurate  at each step in each sum. It would be  idiotic
not to try; for every mistake is going to cause you trouble later on. In the
same  way every moral failure is going  to cause trouble, probably to others
and certainly to yourself. By talking about rules  and obedience instead  of
"ideals" and "idealism" we help to remind ourselves of these facts.
     Now  let us go  a step further. There  are two ways in which the  human
machine  goes  wrong. One  is  when human individuals  drift  apart from one
another,  or else collide with  one another  and do  one  another damage, by
cheating  or  bullying. The  other  is  when  things  go  wrong  inside  the
individual-when the different  parts  of  him (his different  faculties  and
desires and so on) either drift apart or interfere with one another. You can
get  the  idea  plain  if  you  think of us as a fleet of  ships sailing  in
formation.  The  voyage  will  be a success only, in the first place, if the
ships  do not  collide and  get in one another's way; and, secondly, if each
ship is seaworthy  and has her  engines in good order. As a  matter of fact,
you cannot have either of  these two things without the other. If the  ships
keep on  having collisions  they will not remain seaworthy very long. On the
other hand, if their  steering gears are out of order they will not be  able
to avoid collisions.  Or, if you like, think of humanity as a band playing a
tune. To get a good result,  you need two things.  Each player's  individual
instrument must be in tune and also each must come in at the right moment so
as to combine with all the others.
     But there is one thing  we have not yet taken into account. We have not
asked where the fleet is  trying to get to,  or what piece of music the band
is trying to play. The  instruments might  be all in tune and might all come
in  at the right moment, but even so the performance  would not be a success
if they had been engaged  to provide dance music and actually played nothing
but Dead Marches.  And however  well the fleet sailed, its voyage would be a
failure if it were meant to reach New York and actually arrived at Calcutta.
     Morality, then, seems to  be concerned with three things. Firstly, with
fair play  and  harmony between  individuals.  Secondly, with what  might be
called tidying up or harmonising the things inside each individual. Thirdly,
with the  general purpose of human life as a whole: what man  was  made for:
what course the whole  fleet ought to  be on: what tune the conductor of the
band wants it to play.
     You  may have  noticed  that  modern people are nearly always  thinking
about  the first thing  and forgetting the other two. When people say in the
newspapers that we  are striving for Christian moral standards, they usually
mean that we are striving  for kindness and fair play  between  nations, and
classes,  and individuals; that  is, they are thinking  only  of  the  first
thing. When a man says  about  something he wants to do, "It can't  be wrong
because  it doesn't do anyone else any  harm,"  he is thinking only  of  the
first thing. He is thinking it does not matter what his  ship is like inside
provided that he does not run  into the  next ship. And it is quite natural,
when we start thinking about morality, to begin  with the first  thing, with
social relations. For one thing, the results of  bad morality in that sphere
are so obvious and press on us every day: war and poverty and graft and lies
and shoddy work. And also, as long as you stick to the first thing, there is
very little disagreement about morality. Almost all people at all times have
agreed (in theory) that human beings ought to be honest and kind and helpful
to  one another. But  though it  is natural to begin with all  that, if  our
thinking about morality stops there, we might just as well not  have thought
at all. Unless we go on to the second thing-the tidying up inside each human
being-we are only deceiving ourselves.
     What  is the good of telling  the ships how to  steer  so as  to  avoid
collisions if, in fact, they  are such  crazy old tubs  that  they cannot be
steered at  all? What is the good of drawing  up, on paper, rules for social
behaviour, if  we know that, in fact,  our greed, cowardice, ill temper, and
self-conceit are going to prevent us from keeping them?  I do not mean for a
moment that we ought not to think, and think hard, about improvements in our
social and economic system. What I do mean is that all that thinking will be
mere  moonshine  unless  we  realise  that   nothing  but  the  courage  and
unselfishness of individuals is ever going to make any system work properly.
It is easy enough  to remove the particular  kinds of graft or bullying that
go on under  the present system: but as  long as men are twisters or bullies
they will  find  some new way  of carrying  on the old  game  under the  new
system. You cannot make men good  by  law: and  without  good men you cannot
have a good society. That is why we must go on to think of the second thing:
of morality inside the individual.
     But I do not think we can stop there either. We are now  getting to the
point  at which  different beliefs  about  the universe  lead  to  different
behaviour.  And it would seem, at first sight,  very sensible to stop before
we got  there, and  just  carry  on  with those parts of morality  that  all
sensible people agree about. But can  we? Remember  that religion involves a
series  of statements  about  facts,  which must be either true or false. If
they are true, one set of conclusions will follow about the right sailing of
the human fleet: if  they are false, quite a different set. For example, let
us go back to the man who says that a thing cannot be wrong unless it  hurts
some other  human being.  He quite understands  that he must not damage  the
other ships in the  convoy, but he honestly thinks that  what he does to his
own ship is simply his own business. But does it not make a great difference
whether his ship is his  own  property or not?  Does it  not  make  a  great
difference whether I am, so to speak, the landlord of  my own mind and body,
or only a tenant, responsible  to the real  landlord? If  somebody else made
me, for his own purposes, then I  shall have a lot of duties which I  should
not have if I simply belonged to myself.
     Again, Christianity asserts that every individual human  being is going
to live  for ever, and this must  be either true or false.  Now there are  a
good many things which would not be worth bothering about if I were going to
live only seventy years, but which I  had better bother about very seriously
if  I am going to live  for ever. Perhaps my  bad temper or my  jealousy are
gradually  getting  worse -so gradually  that the increase  in seventy years
will  not  be very noticeable. But it might be  absolute  hell  in a million
years:  in  fact, if  Christianity  is true, Hell is the  precisely  correct
technical  term  for what it  would  be.  And  immortality makes this  other
difference, which, by the by, has  a connection with the difference  between
totalitarianism and democracy. If individuals live  only seventy years, then
a  state, or a nation, or  a  civilisation,  which  may last for a  thousand
years,  is more important than an  individual. But if Christianity is  true,
then  the individual  is  not  only  more  important  but incomparably  more
important, for he is everlasting and the life of a state or a  civilisation,
compared with his, is only a moment.
     It seems, then, that if we are to think  about  morality, we must think
of all three departments: relations  between man and man: things inside each
man: and relations between man and  the power that  made  him.  We  can  all
cooperate in  the first  one. Disagreements begin with the second and become
serious with the third.  It  is  in dealing  with  the third that  the  main
differences between Christian  and non-Christian morality come  out. For the
rest of this book I am going to assume the Christian point of view, and look
at the whole picture as it will be if Christianity is true.
2. The "Cardinal Virtues"
     The previous  section  was  originally composed to be given  as a short
talk on the air.
     If you are allowed to talk for only ten minutes, pretty well everything
else has to be sacrificed to brevity.  One of my  chief reasons for dividing
morality up  into three parts  (with  my  picture  of the ships  sailing  in
convoy) was that this seemed the shortest way of covering the ground. Here I
want to give some idea of another way in which the subject has been  divided
by old writers, which  was too long to use in  my talk, but which is a  very
good one.
     According to this longer scheme there are seven "virtues." Four of them
are  called   "Cardinal"   virtues,  and  the  remaining  three  are  called
"Theological"  virtues. The "Cardinal" ones  are those  which all  civilised
people  recognise:  the  "Theological"  are those which,  as  a  rule,  only
Christians know  about. I shall deal with the Theological ones  later on: at
present I am talking about the  four  Cardinal virtues. (The word "cardinal"
has nothing  to  do with  "Cardinals"  in the Roman Church. It comes  from a
Latin  word meaning  "the hinge  of  a door." These were  called  "cardinal"
virtues  because they are, as  we should say, "pivotal.") They are PRUDENCE,
TEMPERANCE, JUSTICE, and FORTITUDE.
     Prudence means practical common sense, taking  the trouble to think out
what you are doing and what is likely  to  come  of it. Nowadays most people
hardly think of  Prudence as one of the "virtues." In  fact,  because Christ
said  we  could  only  get into  His  world  by  being like  children,  many
Christians have the idea that, provided you are  "good," it  does not matter
being  a fool. But  that is a  misunderstanding.  In the  first  place, most
children show  plenty of  "prudence" about doing  the things they are really
interested in,  and think them out quite sensibly. In  the second place,  as
St, Paul points out,  Christ  never meant that we were to remain children in
intelligence: on  the contrary, He told  us to  be not  only "as harmless as
doves," but  also "as  wise as  serpents." He wants a  child's heart,  but a
grown-up's head. He  wants us to be simple, single-minded, affectionate, and
teachable, as good children are; but He also wants every bit of intelligence
we have to  be alert  at its job, and in first-class fighting trim. The fact
that you are  giving money to a charity does not mean that you need  not try
to find out  whether that charity  is a fraud or not. The fact that what you
are thinking about is  God  Himself (for example, when you are praying) does
not mean that you can be  content with the  same babyish ideas which you had
when you were a  five-year-old. It is, of  course,  quite true that God will
not love you any the less, or have less use for you,  if you happen to  have
been born with a  very second-rate brain. He  has room for people  with very
little sense, but He wants every one to use what sense they have. The proper
motto is not "Be good, sweet maid, and let who can be clever," but "Be good,
sweet maid, and don't forget that this involves being as clever as you can."
God is no fonder of intellectual slackers than of any other slackers. If you
are thinking  of becoming  a  Christian,  I warn you  you  are embarking  on
something which is going to  take the whole  of you,  brains and  all.  But,
fortunately, it works the other  way round. Anyone who is honestly trying to
be  a Christian will soon find his intelligence being sharpened: one  of the
reasons  why  it  needs no  special education  to  be a  Christian  is  that
Christianity is an education itself. That is why an uneducated believer like
Bunyan was able to write a book that has astonished the whole world.
     Temperance is, unfortunately,  one of those words that has  changed its
meaning. It now usually means teetotalism. But in the  days when the  second
Cardinal virtue was christened  "Temperance," it meant nothing  of the sort.
Temperance  referred not specially  to  drink, but to all  pleasures; and it
meant not  abstaining,  but going  the right length and no  further. It is a
mistake  to   think   that   Christians  ought  all  to   be   teetotallers;
Mohammedanism, not Christianity, is  the teetotal religion. Of course it may
be the duty of a  particular Christian, or of any Christian, at a particular
time, to abstain from strong drink, either because he is the sort of man who
cannot  drink at all without drinking  too much, or because he wants to give
the  money  to the poor, or because he is  with  people  who are inclined to
drunkenness and must not encourage them by drinking himself.  But  the whole
point is that he  is abstaining, for a good reason,  from something which he
does not condemn and which he likes to see other people enjoying. One of the
marks of a certain type of bad man is that he cannot give up a thing himself
without wanting every one else to give it up. That is not the Christian way.
An  individual  Christian  may see  fit to give up all sorts of  things  for
special reasons-marriage, or meat, or beer, or the cinema; but the moment he
starts saying the things are  bad in themselves, or looking down his nose at
other people who do use them, he has taken the wrong turning.
     One great piece of mischief has been done by the  modern restriction of
the word Temperance to the question of drink. It helps people to forget that
you can be just as intemperate about lots of other  things. A  man who makes
his golf or his motor-bicycle the centre of his life, or a woman who devotes
all  her  thoughts  to  clothes  or  bridge  or  her dog,  is  being just as
"intemperate"  as  someone who gets  drunk every evening. Of course, it does
not  show on the  outside so easily: bridge-mania  or golf-mania do not make
you  fall down in  the middle  of the  road.  But God  is  not  deceived  by
externals.
     Justice means  much  more than  the  sort of thing that goes on in  law
courts. It is the  old name for everything we should now call "fairness"; it
includes honesty,  give  and take, truthfulness, keeping  promises, and  all
that  side  of life. And  Fortitude includes  both kinds of courage-the kind
that faces danger as well as the kind that "sticks it" under pain. "Guts" is
perhaps  the nearest modern English. You will  notice, of  course, that  you
cannot practise any of the other virtues very long without bringing this one
into play.
     There is one further point about the virtues  that ought to be noticed.
There is a difference between doing some particular just or temperate action
and being a just or temperate man. Someone who is not  a good  tennis player
may now and then make a good shot. What you mean by a good player is the man
whose eye and  muscles and nerves have been so trained by making innumerable
good shots  that they can now  be  relied  on. They have  a  certain tone or
quality  which  is  there  even   when  he  is   not  playing,   just  as  a
mathematician's mind  has a certain habit  and outlook  which is there  even
when he is not doing mathematics. In the same way a man  who  perseveres  in
doing just actions gets in the end a certain quality of character. Now it is
that quality rather than the particular actions  which we mean when  we talk
of "virtue."
     This  distinction is important for the following reason. If we  thought
only of the particular actions we might encourage three wrong ideas.
     (1) We might think that,  provided you did the right thing,  it did not
matter how or why you  did  it-whether you did it  willingly or unwillingly,
sulkily  or cheerfully, through fear of public opinion  or for its own sake.
But the truth is that right actions done for the wrong reason do not help to
build the internal quality or character  called  a "virtue," and  it is this
quality or  character  that  really matters.  (If the bad tennis player hits
very  hard, not  because he  sees that a very hard  stroke is required,  but
because he has lost his temper, his stroke might possibly, by luck, help him
to  win that  particular game; but  it will not be  helping him  to become a
reliable player.)
     (2)  We might think that God wanted simply obedience to a set of rules:
whereas He really wants people of a particular sort.
     (3)  We might think  that the "virtues" were  necessary  only for  this
present life-that in the other world we could stop being  just because there
is nothing to quarrel about and stop being brave because there is no danger.
Now  it is quite true that  there will probably be no  occasion  for just or
courageous acts in the  next  world,  but  there will  be every occasion for
being the sort of people that we can become only as the result of doing such
acts  here.  The  point is  not that God will refuse  you admission  to  His
eternal world if you  have not got certain qualities of character: the point
is  that if  people have not got at least the beginnings of  those qualities
inside them, then no possible external conditions could make  a "Heaven" for
them-that is,  could make them happy  with the deep, strong, unshakable kind
of happiness God intends for us.
3. Social Morality
     The first  thing to get clear about Christian morality  between man and
man is that in this department Christ did  not come to preach  any brand new
morality.  The Golden Rule of the New Testament (Do as you would be done by)
is  a summing  up of what everyone, at bottom, had always known to be right.
Really great moral teachers  never do introduce new moralities: it is quacks
and  cranks  who do that. As  Dr. Johnson  said, "People need to be reminded
more often  than they  need  to be  instructed." The real job of every moral
teacher is to keep on bringing us back, time after  time,  to the old simple
principles  which we  are all so anxious not to see; like bringing  a  horse
back and back to the fence it has refused to jump  or bringing a  child back
and back to the bit in its lesson that it wants to shirk.
     The second thing  to get clear is that  Christianity has not, and  does
not profess to have, a detailed political programme  for applying "Do as you
would be done by" to  a particular society at a particular moment. It  could
not have. It is meant for all  men at all times and the particular programme
which suited one place or time would not suit another. And,  anyhow, that is
not how Christianity works. When it tells you to feed the hungry it does not
give  you lessons in cookery. When it  tells you  to  read the Scriptures it
does  not give you lessons  in Hebrew and Greek, or even in English grammar.
It was never  intended to replace or supersede the  ordinary human  arts and
sciences: it is rather a director which will set them all to the right jobs,
and a source of energy which will give them all  new life, if only they will
put themselves at its disposal.
     People say, "The Church ought to give us a  lead." That is true if they
mean it in the right way, but false if they mean it in the wrong way. By the
Church they ought to mean the whole body of practising Christians. And  when
they say that the Church should give us a lead, they ought to mean that some
Christians- those who happen to have the right talents- should be economists
and statesmen, and that all economists and statesmen should  be  Christians,
and that their whole efforts in politics and economics should be directed to
putting "Do as  you would be done by" into action. If  that happened, and if
we  others were really ready to take it, then  we should  find the Christian
solution for our own social problems pretty quickly.  But,  of  course, when
they ask for a lead from the Church most people mean they want the clergy to
put  out  a  political  programme.  That  is  silly.  The clergy  are  those
particular people within the whole Church  who have  been  specially trained
and set aside to look after what concerns us as  creatures who  are going to
live for ever: and we are asking them to do a quite different job for  which
they  have not been trained. The job  is  really on us, on the  laymen.  The
application of Christian  principles,  say, to  trade unionism or education,
must come from Christian trade unionists  and Christian schoolmasters:  just
as Christian literature comes from Christian novelists and  dramatists  -not
from  the bench of bishops  getting together  and trying  to write plays and
novels in their spare time.
     All the same, the New Testament, without going into details, gives us a
pretty clear  hint of what a  fully Christian society would be like. Perhaps
it gives  us  more than we  can  take. It tells us  that there  are to be no
passengers  or parasites: if  man does not work, he ought not to  eat. Every
one is to work with his own hands, and what  is more, every one's work is to
produce something good: there will be no manufacture  of silly  luxuries and
then  of sillier advertisements  to persuade us to buy them. And there is to
be no "swank" or "side," no putting  on  airs. To that  extent  a  Christian
society would  be what  we now call Leftist. On the other hand, it is always
insisting on obedience-obedience (and outward marks  of respect) from all of
us  to properly appointed magistrates, from  children to parents, and  (I am
afraid this is going  to be very unpopular) from wives to husbands. Thirdly,
it is to be a cheerful society: full of singing and rejoicing, and regarding
worry or anxiety as wrong. Courtesy is one of the Christian virtues; and the
New Testament hates what it calls "busybodies."
     If there were such  a society in existence  and you  or I visited it, I
think we should come away with a curious impression. We should feel that its
economic life was very socialistic and, in that sense, "advanced,"  but that
its  family life and its code of  manners were  rather old-fashioned-perhaps
even ceremonious and aristocratic. Each of  us  would like some bits  of it,
but I am afraid very few of us would like the whole thing. That is just what
one would expect if Christianity is the total plan for the human machine. We
have  all departed  from that total plan  in different ways, and each  of us
wants to make out that his own modification of the original plan is the plan
itself. You will find  this  again  and again about anything that  is really
Christian: every one is attracted by bits of it  and wants to pick out those
bits and leave the rest. That is why we do not get much further: and that is
why people who are  fighting for quite opposite things can both say they are
fighting for Christianity.
     Now another  point.  There is one  bit of  advice given to  us  by  the
ancient heathen Greeks,  and  by the Jews in  the Old Testament, and  by the
great Christian  teachers of  the  Middle  Ages, which  the  modern economic
system has  completely disobeyed. All these people told us not to lend money
at  interest: and lending money at  interest-what we call  investment-is the
basis of  our  whole system. Now it may  not  absolutely  follow that we are
wrong.  Some  people say that  when  Moses and Aristotle and the  Christians
agreed in forbidding interest (or "usury" as they called it), they could not
foresee the  joint  stock  company,  and were  only dunking of  the  private
moneylender,  and that, therefore,  we need not bother about what they said.
That is a question I cannot decide on. I am not an economist and I simply do
not know whether the investment system is  responsible for the state  we are
in  or  not This is where we  want the Christian economist But I should  not
have been honest if I  had not  told you that three  great civilisations had
agreed (or so it seems at first sight) in condemning the very thing on which
we have based our whole life.
     One more  point and I am done.  In the passage where the  New Testament
says  that every one must work, it gives  as  a reason "in order that he may
have something to give to those in need." Charity-giving  to the poor-is  an
essential part  of Christian morality: in the  frightening  parable  of  the
sheep and the goats it seems to be the point on which everything turns. Some
people nowadays say that charity ought to be unnecessary and that instead of
giving to the poor we ought to be producing a society in which there were no
poor to  give to. They may be quite right in saying that we ought to produce
that kind of society. But if anyone  thinks that, as a consequence,  you can
stop  giving in the meantime, then he has  parted company with all Christian
morality.  I do not believe one can  settle how much we ought to  give. I am
afraid the only safe rule is to give more than we can spare. In other words,
if our expenditure  on comforts, luxuries, amusements,  etc,  is  up to  the
standard common among those with the same income as our own, we are probably
giving away too little. If our charities do not at all pinch or hamper us, I
should say they are too small There ought  to be things we should like to do
and  cannot  do  because  our charitable  expenditure  excludes them.  I  am
speaking now of "charities" in the common  way. Particular cases of distress
among your own relatives, friends, neighbours or employees, which God, as it
were, forces upon your notice, may demand  much more: even to the  crippling
and endangering of  your  own position. For many of us the great obstacle to
charity lies not in  our luxurious living  or desire for more money, but  in
our fear-fear of insecurity. This must often be recognised as a  temptation.
Sometimes our  pride also hinders our charity; we are  tempted to spend more
than we ought  on the showy forms  of generosity (tipping, hospitality)  and
less than we ought on those who really need our help.
     And now, before  I end, I am going to venture on a guess as to how this
section  has  affected any who have  read it My guess is that there are some
Leftist people among them who are very angry that it has not gone further in
that direction, and some people of an opposite sort who  are  angry  because
they think  it has gone much too far. If so, that brings us right up against
the  real snag in all this drawing up of blueprints for a Christian society.
Most of us are not really approaching  the subject in order to find out what
Christianity says: we are approaching it in the hope of finding support from
Christianity  for  the  views of our own  party. We are looking for  an ally
where we are offered either a Master  or-a Judge. I am just the same.  There
are bits in this section that I wanted to leave out. And that is why nothing
whatever  is  going  to come of such talks unless we  go a  much longer  way
round.  A Christian  society  is not going to arrive until most of us really
want it: and we are not going to want it until we become fully Christian.  I
may repeat "Do as you would be done by"  till I am black in the  face, but I
cannot really carry it out till I love  my neighbour as myself: and I cannot
learn to love my  neighbour as myself till I learn to love God: and I cannot
learn to love God except by learning  to obey Him. And so,  as I warned you,
we are driven on to  something more inward -driven on from social matters to
religious matters. For the longest way round is the shortest way home.
4. Morality and Psychoanalysis
     I have said that we should never get a Christian society unless most of
us became Christian individuals. That does  not mean, of course, that we can
put  off  doing anything about society until some imaginary  date in the far
future. It means  that we must begin both jobs at once-(1) the job of seeing
how "Do as you would be done by" can be applied in detail to modern society,
and (2) the job of becoming the sort of people who  really would apply it if
we saw  how.  I now want to  begin considering  what the Christian idea of a
good man is-the Christian specification for the human machine.
     Before  I  come  down  to details  there are  two more general points I
should like to make.  First of all,  since Christian morality claims to be a
technique for putting the human  machine  right, I  think you would  like to
know how it is  related  to  another technique which seems to make a similar
claim-namely, psychoanalysis.
     Now you want to distinguish very  clearly  between two  things: between
the  actual medical  theories and  technique of the psychoanalysts,  and the
general  philosophical  view  of the world which Freud and some others  have
gone on  to  add to this.  The second  thing-the philosophy  of Freud-is  in
direct  contradiction  to  Christianity: and also in direct contradiction to
the other great  psychologist, Jung. And  furthermore, when Freud is talking
about  how to  cure  neurotics  he is speaking as  a specialist  on his  own
subject, but when he goes on to talk general philosophy he is speaking as an
amateur. It is therefore quite sensible to attend to him with respect in the
one case and not in the other-and that is what I do. I am all the readier to
do it because I have found that when  he  is talking off his own subject and
on  a  subject I  do know  something  about (namely,  languages) he  is very
ignorant.  But  psychoanalysis  itself,  apart from  all  the  philosophical
additions  that Freud  and  others  have  made to it, is not  in  the  least
contradictory  to  Christianity.  Its  technique  overlaps   with  Christian
morality at some points and it would not be a bad thing if every parson knew
something about it: but it does not run the same course all the way, for the
two techniques are doing rather different things.
     When a man makes a moral choice two things are involved. One is the act
of choosing. The other is the various feelings, impulses and so on which his
psychological  outfit presents him with, and which  are the raw material  of
his choice. Now this raw material may be of two kinds. Either it may be what
we would call normal: it may consist of the sort of feelings that are common
to all men. Or else it may consist of quite unnatural feelings due to things
that have  gone  wrong  in his subconscious.  Thus fear of  things that  are
really dangerous would be an example of the  first kind:  an irrational fear
of cats or spiders would be an  example  of the second kind. The desire of a
man for a woman  would  be of the first kind: the perverted  desire of a man
for a man would be of  the second. Now what psychoanalysis  undertakes to do
is to remove the  abnormal  feelings, that is, to give  the  man better  raw
material for  his acts of  choice: morality is  concerned with the  acts  of
choice themselves.
     Put it this  way. Imagine three men who go to war. One has the ordinary
natural fear of danger that  any man has  and he subdues it by  moral effort
and becomes a brave man. Let us suppose that the other two have, as a result
of things in  their sub-consciousness, exaggerated, irrational  fears, which
no amount  of  moral  effort  can  do anything  about.  Now  suppose that  a
psychoanalyst comes  along  and cures these two:  that is, he puts them both
back in the  position  of the  first man. Well  it  is just  then  that  the
psychoanalytical problem is over and the moral problem begins.  Because, now
that they are  cured, these two  men  might  take quite different lines. The
first might  say, "Thank goodness I've  got rid of all those doodahs. Now at
last I can do what I always wanted to do-my duty  to the cause  of freedom."
But  the  other might say, "Well, I'm very glad that  I now feel  moderately
cool under fire, but, of course, that doesn't alter the fact that  I'm still
jolly well determined to look after Number One and let the other chap do the
dangerous job  whenever I can. Indeed  one of the good things about  feeling
less frightened is that  I can now  look  after myself much more efficiently
and can  be  much cleverer  at hiding  the fact from the  others."  Now this
difference is a purely moral one and psychoanalysis cannot do anything about
it.  However  much you improve the man's raw material, you  have  still  got
something else: the real, free choice of the man, on  the material presented
to him,  either to put his own advantage first or  to  put it last And this$
free choice is the only thing that morality is concerned with.
     The bad psychological material is not a sin but a disease.  It does not
need  to  be  repented  of, but to  be cured. And  by the way, that is  very
important.  Human beings judge one another  by their  external  actions. God
judges them by their moral choices. When a neurotic who  has  a pathological
horror of cats  forces himself  to pick up a cat for some good reason, it is
quite possible that in God's eyes he  has shown more courage than  a healthy
man may have shown in  winning the  V.C. When  a man who has  been perverted
from his youth and  taught that  cruelty is the right thing, does some  tiny
little kindness, or refrains from some cruelty he  might have committed, and
thereby, perhaps, risks being sneered at by his companions, he may, in God's
eyes, be doing more than you and I would do if we gave up life itself for  a
friend.
     It is as  well  to put this  the  other way round. Some of us  who seem
quite nice people may, in fact, have made so little  use of  a good heredity
and  a good upbringing that we are really worse than those whom we regard as
fiends. Can  we be  quite certain how we should have behaved if we had  been
saddled with the psychological outfit, and then with the bad upbringing, and
then with the power, say, of Himmler? That is why Christians are told not to
judge.
     We see  only  the results which a  man's choices  make  out of his  raw
material. But God does not judge him on the raw material at all, but on what
he has done with it. Most of the man's psychological make-up is probably due
to his body:  when  his body dies all  that will fall off  him, and the real
central  man.  the thing that chose,  that made the best or the worst out of
this material, will  stand naked. All sorts of nice  things which we thought
our own, but  which were  really due to a good digestion, will fall off some
of  us: all sorts of nasty things which were due to complexes or  bad health
will fall off others. We shall then, for the first tune, see every one as he
really was. There will be surprises.
     And that  leads on to my second  point. People often think of Christian
morality as a kind of bargain in which God says, "If you keep a lot of rules
I'll reward  you, and if you don't I'll do the other thing."  I do not think
that is the best way of looking at  it. I would much rather say  that  every
time you make a choice you are  turning the central part of you, the part of
you that chooses, into something a little different from what it was before.
And taking your life as a whole, with all your innumerable choices, all your
life long you are slowly turning this central thing either  into  a heavenly
creature  or into a  hellish creature:  either into  a  creature that  is in
harmony with God, and  with other  creatures, and  with itself, or else into
one  that  is  in  a  state  of  war and  hatred  with  God,  and  with  its
fellow-creatures, and with itself. To be the one kind of creature is heaven:
that is, it is joy and peace and knowledge and  power. To be the other means
madness, horror, idiocy, rage, impotence, and eternal loneliness. Each of us
at each moment is progressing to the one state or the other.
     That  explains what always used to  puzzle me  about Christian writers;
they  seem to be so  very strict at one moment and so very free  and easy at
another. They  talk about  mere sins  of thought as if  they were  immensely
important:  and  then  they  talk  about  the  most  frightful  murders  and
treacheries as if you had only got to repent and all  would be forgiven. But
I have come to see that they are right. What they are  always thinking of is
the mark which the action leaves on that tiny central self which no one sees
in this life but which each of us will have to endure-or enjoy-for ever. One
man may  be  so  placed  that  his anger sheds  the blood of  thousands, and
another so placed that however angry he gets he will only be laughed at. But
the  little mark on the soul  may be much the  same in both. Each  has  done
something to himself  which,  unless he repents, will make it harder for him
to  keep  out  of the rage  next time he is  tempted, and will make the rage
worse when he does fall into it. Each of them, if he seriously turns to God,
can have  that twist in the central  man straightened out again: each is, in
the long run, doomed if he will not. The  bigness or smallness of the thing,
seen from the outside, is not what really matters.
     One last point. Remember that, as I said, the right direction leads not
only  to peace but to knowledge. When a man is getting better he understands
more  and  more clearly the evil  that is still left in him.  When a  man is
getting  worse, he understands his own badness  less and less. A  moderately
bad  man knows he  is not very good: a  thoroughly bad man thinks he is  all
right. This  is  common sense,  really. You understand  sleep  when you  are
awake, not while you are sleeping.  You  can see mistakes in arithmetic when
your mind  is working  properly: while you are  making  them you cannot  see
them. You can understand the nature of drunkenness  when you are  sober, not
when you are drunk. Good people know about both good and evil: bad people do
not know about either.
5. Sexual Morality
     We must now consider Christian morality as regards sex, what Christians
call the virtue  of  chastity.  The Christian rule of  chastity must not  be
confused with the social rule of "modesty" (in one sense of that word); i.e.
propriety, or decency. The social rule of propriety lays  down  how much  of
the human body should be displayed and what subjects can be referred to, and
in what  words, according  to the  customs of a given social  circle.  Thus,
while the rule of chastity is the same for all Christians at all  times, the
rule of propriety  changes. A girl in the Pacific islands wearing hardly any
clothes and a Victorian lady  completely covered in  clothes  might  both be
equally "modest," proper, or decent, according to the standards of their own
societies: and both, for all we  could tell by their dress, might be equally
chaste  (or equally unchaste). Some  of the language which chaste women used
in Shakespeare's time would have been used in the nineteenth century only by
a  woman completely  abandoned.  When  people  break the rule  of  propriety
current in their own time and place, if they  do so in order to excite  lust
in themselves  or  others, then they are offending  against chastity. But if
they break it through ignorance or carelessness they  are guilty only of bad
manners. When, as often happens, they break  it defiantly in  order to shock
or embarrass others,  they  are not necessarily being unchaste, but they are
being uncharitable: for it is  uncharitable to take pleasure in making other
people uncomfortable. I do not think that a very strict or fussy standard of
propriety is any proof of chastity or any help to it, and I therefore regard
the great relaxation and simplifying of the rule which has taken place in my
own  lifetime as a  good  thing.  At its present stage, however, it has this
inconvenience, that people of different ages  and different types do not all
acknowledge the  same standard,  and we hardly know where we are. While this
confusion  lasts I  think that old, or old-fashioned,  people should be very
careful  not  to  assume  that  young  or  "emancipated"  people are corrupt
whenever they are (by the old standard) improper; and, in return, that young
people  should not call their elders  prudes or puritans because they do not
easily adopt the new standard. A real desire to believe all the good you can
of  others and to make others as comfortable as  you can  will solve most of
the problems.
     Chastity is the  most unpopular of  the Christian  virtues. There is no
getting  away  from  it: the old  Christian rule is,  "Either marriage, with
complete  faithfulness to your partner,  or else total abstinence." Now this
is so  difficult  and  so  contrary to our instincts, that  obviously either
Christianity is wrong or our sexual instinct, as it  now is, has gone wrong.
One or the other. Of course, being  a Christian, I think it  is the instinct
which has gone wrong.
     But I have other reasons for thinking so. The biological purpose of sex
is children, just as the biological purpose of eating is to repair the body.
Now  if we eat whenever we feel inclined  and just as much as we want, it is
quite true that most of us will eat too much: but not terrifically too much.
One man  may  eat enough for two, but he does not  eat enough for  ten.  The
appetite goes  a little beyond its biological purpose,  but  not enormously.
But  if  a healthy  young man indulged his sexual  appetite whenever he felt
inclined, and if each act produced a baby, then in ten years he might easily
populate  a  small village. This appetite is  in  ludicrous and preposterous
excess of its function.
     Or  take it  another  way. You  can get a large audience together for a
strip-tease act-that is,  to watch  a girl undress on the stage. Now suppose
you came to a country  where you could fill a  theatre  by simply bringing a
covered plate on to the stage and then slowly lifting the cover so as to let
every one see, just before the lights went out, that  it  contained a mutton
chop or a bit of bacon, would you  not think  that in that country something
had  gone wrong  with the  appetite  for food? And would  not anyone who had
grown up in  a different world think there was something equally queer about
the state of the sex instinct among us?
     One  critic said  that if he  found a  country in which such striptease
acts  with  food  were  popular,  he would conclude that the people  of that
country were starving. He meant, of course, to imply that such things as the
strip-tease  act  resulted  not  from  sexual  corruption  but  from  sexual
starvation. I agree with him that if,  in  some strange land, we found  that
similar  acts  with  mutton  chops  were   popular,  one   of  the  possible
explanations  which would  occur to me  would  be famine. But the  next step
would be to  test our hypothesis by finding out  whether,  in fact,  much or
little food was being consumed in that country. If the evidence showed  that
a good deal was being eaten, then of  course we  should  have to abandon the
hypothesis  of starvation and try to think of another one. In the same  way,
before  accepting sexual starvation  as  the cause of  the  strip-tease,  we
should  have  to  look  for  evidence  that  there is in  fact  more  sexual
abstinence in our age  than in those ages when  things like  the strip-tease
were unknown. But surely there is no such evidence. Contraceptives have made
sexual  indulgence far less costly within marriage  and far safer outside it
than ever  before, and public opinion is  less hostile to illicit unions and
even to perversion than it has been since Pagan times. Nor is the hypothesis
of "starvation" the only one we can imagine. Everyone knows that  the sexual
appetite, like our other  appetites, grows by indulgence.  Starving men  may
think much  about  food, but so  do gluttons;  the  gorged, as  well  as the
famished, like titillations.
     Here is a third  point. You find very few people who want to eat things
that  really are not food or  to do other things with food instead of eating
it.  In  other  words,  perversions  of  the food  appetite  are  rare.  But
perversions of the sex instinct are numerous, hard to cure, and frightful. I
am sorry to have to go into all these details, but I must. The reason why  I
must is  that you and  I,  for the last twenty years, have been  fed all day
long on  good solid lies about  sex. We have been told,  till one is sick of
hearing  it, that  sexual desire  is in the  same state as any  of our other
natural desires and that if only we abandon  the silly old Victorian idea of
hushing it up, everything in the garden will be lovely. It is not  true. The
moment you look at the facts, and away  from the propaganda, you see that it
is not.
     They tell you sex  has become a  mess because it was hushed up. But for
the last twenty years it has not been hushed up. It has been chattered about
all day long. Yet it is still in a mess. If hushing up had been the cause of
the trouble, ventilation would have set it right. But it has not. I think it
is  the other way  round. I think  the  human race originally  hushed it  up
because it had become such a mess.  Modern people are always saying, "Sex is
nothing to be ashamed of." They may mean two things. They may mean "There is
nothing to be ashamed of in  the fact  that the human race reproduces itself
in a  certain way, nor  in the  fact that it  gives pleasure." If they  mean
that, they are right. Christianity  says the same. It  is not the thing, nor
the pleasure, that is the trouble. The old Christian teachers  said  that if
man had never fallen, sexual pleasure, instead of being less than it is now,
would actually have been greater. I  know some muddle-headed Christians have
talked as if Christianity thought that sex,  or the body,  or pleasure, were
bad in themselves. But they were wrong. Christianity is  almost the only one
of the great religions which thoroughly approves  of the body-which believes
that matter is good, that God Himself once took on a  human body,  that some
kind of body is going to be given to us even in Heaven and is going to be an
essential  part of our happiness,  our beauty,  and our energy. Christianity
has glorified marriage  more  than  any other religion: and  nearly  all the
greatest love poetry in the world has been produced by Christians. If anyone
says that sex, in itself, is bad, Christianity contradicts him at once. But,
of course, when people say, "Sex is nothing to be ashamed of," they may mean
"the  state into  which the sexual  instinct  has now  got is  nothing to be
ashamed of."
     If they mean that, I think they are wrong. I  think it is everything to
be ashamed of. There is nothing  to be ashamed  of  in enjoying  your  food:
there would  be everything  to be ashamed of if half the world made food the
main  interest  of  their lives and spent their time looking at  pictures of
food  and dribbling and  smacking their lips.  I do not say  you  and I  are
individually  responsible  for the  present  situation. Our  ancestors  have
handed over to us organisms which are warped in this respect: and we grow up
surrounded by propaganda in favour of unchastity. There  are people who want
to keep our sex instinct inflamed in order to make money out of us. Because,
of  course,  a  man  with  an  obsession  is  a  man  who  has  very  little
sales-resistance. God knows our situation; He will not judge us as if we had
no difficulties to  overcome. What matters is the sincerity and perseverance
of our will to overcome them.
     Before we can be cured we must want to be cured.  Those who really wish
for help will get it; but for many modern people even the wish is difficult.
It is easy to think that  we want something when we do not really want it. A
famous Christian long ago  told us  that when he was a  young man  he prayed
constantly for chastity; but years later he realised that while his lips had
been saying, "Oh Lord,  make me chaste," his heart had been secretly adding,
"But please don't do  it just yet."  This may  happen in  prayers for  other
virtues too; but there are three  reasons why  it is now specially difficult
for us to desire-let alone to achieve-complete chastity.
     In the first place our warped natures, the devils who tempt us, and all
the contemporary propaganda  for lust,  combine to  make us  feel  that  the
desires we are resisting are so "natural," so  "healthy," and so reasonable,
that it is almost perverse and abnormal to resist them. Poster after poster,
film after film, novel after novel, associate the idea of sexual  indulgence
with the ideas of health, normality, youth,  frankness, and good humour. Now
this  association  is  a  lie.  Like all  powerful  lies, it is  based  on a
truth-the  truth,  acknowledged  above, that  sex in  itself (apart from the
excesses and obsessions that have grown round it) is "normal" and "healthy,"
and all the rest of it. The lie  consists in  the suggestion that any sexual
act to which you are tempted at the moment  is also healthy  and normal. Now
this, on  any conceivable  view, and quite apart from Christianity, must  be
nonsense.  Surrender  to  all our  desires  obviously  leads  to  impotence,
disease,  jealousies, lies, concealment, and everything that  is the reverse
of  health, good  humour,  and frankness. For any happiness,  even  in  this
world, quite a lot of restraint is going to be necessary; so  the claim made
by every desire, when it is strong, to be healthy and reasonable, counts for
nothing.  Every sane  and civilised man must have some  set of principles by
which he chooses to reject some of his desires and to permit others. One man
does  this on  Christian principles, another on hygienic principles, another
on sociological principles.  The real  conflict is not between  Christianity
and "nature," but between  Christian principle and other  principles in  the
control of "nature." For "nature" (in the sense of natural desire) will have
to be  controlled anyway, unless you are going to  ruin your whole life. The
Christian principles are, admittedly, stricter than the others;  but then we
think you will get help towards obeying them which you will  not get towards
obeying the others.
     In the second place, many people are deterred from seriously attempting
Christian chastity because they think (before trying) that it is impossible.
But when a thing has to be attempted, one must never think about possibility
or impossibility.  Faced with an optional question  in an examination paper,
one considers  whether  one  can  do  it or  not:  faced with  a  compulsory
question, one  must do the best one can. You  may get some marks for  a very
imperfect  answer:  you  will  certainly  get none  for leaving the question
alone. Not  only in examinations  but  in  war,  in  mountain  climbing,  in
learning to skate, or  swim, or ride a bicycle,  even  in fastening a  stiff
collar  with  cold  fingers, people  quite often do what  seemed  impossible
before they did it. It is wonderful what you can do when you have to.
     We may, indeed, be sure that perfect chastity-like perfect charity-will
not  be attained by  any merely human efforts. You must ask for God's  help.
Even when you have done so, it may seem to you for a long time that no help,
or less help than you need, is being  given. Never mind. After each failure,
ask forgiveness, pick yourself up,  and try again. Very often what God first
helps  us towards is  not  the virtue  itself but just this  power of always
trying  again. For however important chastity (or  courage, or truthfulness,
or any other virtue) may be, this  process trains  us in habits  of the soul
which are more important  still.  It cures our illusions about ourselves and
teaches us to depend on God. We learn, on the one hand, that we cannot trust
ourselves  even  in our best moments, and, on  the  other, that we  need not
despair even in  our  worst, for our failures are  forgiven. The  only fatal
thing is to sit down content with anything less than perfection.
     Thirdly,  people often  misunderstand  what  psychology  teaches  about
"repressions."  It  teaches  us  that  "repressed"  sex  is  dangerous.  But
"repressed" is here a technical term: it  does not mean "suppressed" in  the
sense of "denied" or  "resisted." A repressed desire or thought is one which
has been thrust  into the subconscious (usually at a very early age) and can
now  come  before  the mind  only in  a disguised  and unrecognisable  form.
Repressed sexuality  does not appear to the patient to be sexuality  at all.
When an adolescent or  an adult is engaged in  resisting a conscious desire,
he  is  not dealing with  a  repression nor  is he  in  the  least danger of
creating a repression. On  the contrary, those  who are seriously attempting
chastity are more conscious, and soon know a great deal more about their own
sexuality than  anyone  else. They come to know  their desires as Wellington
knew Napoleon, or  as Sherlock Holmes knew Moriarty; as  a rat-catcher knows
rats  or   a  plumber  knows   about  leaky  pipes.   Virtue-even  attempted
virtue-brings light; indulgence brings fog.
     Finally, though I have had to speak at some length about sex, I want to
make it as clear as  I possibly can that the centre of Christian morality is
not here. If anyone thinks that Christians regard  unchastity as the supreme
vice, he is quite  wrong. The sins  of the  flesh are  bad, but they are the
least  bad  of all sins.  All the worst  pleasures are purely spiritual: the
pleasure of  putting other  people  in the wrong, of bossing and patronising
and spoiling  sport, and back-biting; the pleasures of power, of hatred. For
there are two things inside me, competing  with the human self which  I must
try  to  become. They  are the Animal self, and  the  Diabolical  self.  The
Diabolical self is the worse of the two. That is  why a cold, self-righteous
prig  who  goes  regularly  to church  may  be  far  nearer  to hell  than a
prostitute. But, of course, it is better to be neither.
6. Christian Marriage
     The last chapter  was  mainly negative. I discussed what was wrong with
the sexual impulse in man, but said very little about  its  right working-in
other words, about Christian marriage. There are  two  reasons  why I do not
particularly  want  to deal with marriage. The first  is  that the Christian
doctrines on this subject are extremely unpopular. The second is that I have
never been  married  myself, and, therefore, can  speak only at second hand.
But in  spite of  that, I feel I  can  hardly leave  the subject out  in  an
account of  Christian morals.  The Christian  idea of  marriage is based  on
Christ's  words  that a  man  and  wife  are  to  be  regarded  as  a single
organism-for that is what the words "one flesh" would  be in modern English.
And the Christians believe that when He said this  He was  not  expressing a
sentiment  but stating  a fact-just as  one is stating a fact when  one says
that a lock and  its key are one mechanism, or that a  violin and  a bow are
one  musical instrument.  The inventor of  the human machine was  telling us
that  its two  halves,  the male and  the female,  were made to be  combined
together in pairs, not simply on the sexual level, but totally combined. The
monstrosity of sexual intercourse outside marriage is that those who indulge
in it  are trying  to isolate one  kind  of union (the sexual) from all  the
other kinds of union which were intended to go along with it and make up the
total  union. The Christian  attitude does not  mean that there  is anything
wrong about sexual pleasure, any more than about the  pleasure of eating. It
means that  you must not isolate that pleasure and  try to get it by itself,
any  more than  you  ought to try to  get  the  pleasures  of taste  without
swallowing and digesting, by chewing things and spitting them out again.
     As a consequence, Christianity teaches that marriage is for life. There
is,  of course, a difference  here  between  different Churches: some do not
admit divorce at all; some allow it reluctantly in very special cases. It is
a great pity that Christians should disagree about such  a question; but for
an ordinary layman the thing  to notice is that Churches all agree with  one
another about  marriage a great deal more than  any of them  agrees with the
outside world. I mean,  they all regard divorce as something like cutting up
a  living  body, as  a kind of surgical  operation. Some of them  think  the
operation so violent that it cannot be done  at  all; others admit  it  as a
desperate remedy in extreme cases. They are  all agreed that it is more like
having  both your legs  cut  off  than it  is  like  dissolving  a  business
partnership or even deserting  a regiment What they all disagree with is the
modern view that  it  is  a  simple  readjustment of  partners,  to  be made
whenever people  feel they are  no  longer in love with one another, or when
either of them falls in love with someone else.
     Before we  consider this modern  view in its relation  to  chastity, we
must  not  forget  to  consider it in  relation  to  another  virtue, namely
justice. Justice, as I said before, includes the keeping  of  promises.  Now
everyone who has  been married in a church has made a public, solemn promise
to  stick  to his (or her)  partner  till death.  The duty  of keeping  that
promise has no special connection  with sexual morality: it  is  in the same
position  as any other promise.  If, as modern people are always telling us,
the sexual impulse is just like all our  other impulses, then it ought to be
treated  like all  our other impulses; and as their indulgence is controlled
by our promises, so  should its be. If, as I think,  it is not like all  our
other impulses,  but  is  morbidly  inflamed,  then we should be  especially
careful not to let it lead us into dishonesty.
     To this someone may reply that he regarded  the promise made in  church
as a mere formality and never intended to keep it. Whom, then, was he trying
to deceive when he made  it? God? That was really very unwise. Himself? That
was not  very much wiser. The bride,  or bridegroom, or the  "in-laws"? That
was treacherous.  Most often,  I think, the couple (or one of them) hoped to
deceive the  public. They  wanted  the  respectability  that is attached  to
marriage without intending to pay  the price:  that is, they were imposters,
they cheated.  If they are  still contented cheats, I have nothing to say to
them: who would urge the high and  hard duty of chastity on  people who have
not  yet wished  to be merely honest? If they have now  come to their senses
and want to  be honest, their  promise,  already made, constrains  them. And
this,  you  will  see, comes  under  the  heading  of justice, not  that  of
chastity. If  people do  not believe in  permanent marriage,  it  is perhaps
better that they should live together unmarried  than that they should  make
vows  they do not mean to  keep. It is true that by living  together without
marriage they  will be  guilty (in  Christian  eyes) of fornication. But one
fault  is not mended by adding another: unchastity is not improved by adding
perjury.
     The idea that "being in love" is the only reason for remaining  married
really leaves no room for marriage as a  contract or promise at all. If love
is the  whole  thing, then  the  promise can add  nothing;  and if  it  adds
nothing,  then  it should  not be made. The curious  thing  is  that  lovers
themselves, while they remain  really in  love, know this better than  those
who talk about love. As Chesterton pointed out, those who are in love have a
natural inclination to bind themselves by promises. Love songs all over  the
world are  full of  vows  of  eternal constancy.  The Christian  law  is not
forcing  upon  the  passion  of  love  something which  is  foreign  to that
passion's own nature:  it is  demanding  that lovers  should take  seriously
something which their passion of itself impels them to do.
     And, of course, the promise, made when I am in love and because I am in
love, to be true to the beloved as long as I live, commits one to being true
even if I cease to be in love. A promise must be about things that I can do,
about  actions:  no one can promise to go on feeling in  a certain  way.  He
might as well promise never to have a headache or always to feel hungry. But
what, it may be asked, is the use of keeping two people together if they are
no longer in love? There are several  sound, social  reasons;  to  provide a
home for their  children, to protect  the woman (who has probably sacrificed
or damaged  her own career by  getting  married) from being dropped whenever
the man is tired of her. But there is also another reason of which I am very
sure, though I find it a little hard to explain.
     It is  hard because so  many people cannot be brought  to realise  that
when B is better than C, A may be  even better than B. They like thinking in
terms of  good  and bad,  not of good, better, and best, or  bad, worse  and
worst. They want  to know whether you think patriotism a good thing:  if you
reply  that it is, of  course,  far  better than individual selfishness, but
that it  is  inferior to universal charity  and  should always  give  way to
universal charity when the  two conflict,  they think you are being evasive.
They  ask what you  think of dueling. If you reply that it is far better  to
forgive  a man than to fight a duel with him, but that even  a duel might be
better  than a lifelong enmity which expresses itself in  secret  efforts to
"do the man down," they go away complaining that  you would not give  them a
straight answer.  I hope no one  will make this mistake  about what I am now
going to say.
     What we call "being in love" is a glorious state, and, in several ways,
good for us. It helps to make us generous  and courageous, it opens our eyes
not only to the beauty of the beloved but to all beauty, and it subordinates
(especially  at first) our merely  animal  sexuality; in that sense, love is
the great conqueror of lust. No one in his senses would  deny that being  in
love is far better than either  common sensuality or cold  self-centredness.
But, as I said  before, "the  most dangerous thing you can do is to take any
one impulse of our own nature and set it up as the thing you ought to follow
at all  costs." Being in love is a good thing, but it is not the best thing.
There are  many  things below it, but  there are also things  above it.  You
cannot  make it the basis of a whole  life. It is a noble feeling, but it is
still  a feeling. Now  no  feeling  can be  relied  on  to last in its  full
intensity, or even to last at all.  Knowledge can last, principles can last,
habits can last; but feelings come and go. And in fact, whatever people say,
the state called "being in love" usually does not last. If the old fairytale
ending "They lived happily ever after" is taken to mean  "They  felt for the
next  fifty years  exactly as  they felt  the day before they were married,"
then it says what probably  never  was  nor ever could be true, and would be
highly undesirable if it were. Who could bear to live in that excitement for
even five years? What would become of your work,  your appetite, your sleep,
your friendships? But, of course, ceasing to  be "in  love"  need  not  mean
ceasing to love. Love in this second  sense-love as distinct  from "being in
love" is not merely  a feeling.  It is a deep unity, maintained by  the will
and  deliberately  strengthened  by  habit;  reinforced   by  (in  Christian
marriages) the grace which both parents ask, and receive, from God. They can
have  this love for each other  even at those moments when they do not  like
each other; as you  love yourself even when you do  not  like yourself. They
can  retain  this  love  even  when  each  would  easily,  if  they  allowed
themselves, be "in love" with someone else. "Being in love" first moved them
to promise fidelity: this quieter love enables them to keep  the promise. It
is on  this love  that the engine of marriage is run:  being in love was the
explosion that started it.
     If you disagree with me, of course,  you will  say,  "He knows  nothing
about it, he is  not  married."  You may quite possibly be right. But before
you say  that,  make  quite sure that you are judging me by what you  really
know from your own experience  and from watching the  lives of your friends,
and not by ideas you have derived from novels and films. This is not so easy
to do as people think.  Our  experience  is coloured through and through  by
books  and  plays  and  the  cinema,  and it takes  patience  and  skill  to
disentangle the things we have really learned from life for ourselves.
     People  get  from  books the idea  that if  you have married  the right
person you may expect to go on "being in  love" for ever. As a result,  when
they find they are not,  they think this proves they have made a mistake and
are  entitled to a  change-not realising that,  when  they have changed, the
glamour will presently go out of the new love just as it went out of the old
one.  In this department of life, as  in every  other,  thrills come  at the
beginning and do not last. The sort of thrill a boy has at the first idea of
flying will not go on when  he  has joined the R.A.F. and is really learning
to fly. The thrill you feel on first seeing some  delightful place dies away
when you really  go to live there. Does this mean it would  be better not to
learn to fly  and not to  live in the beautiful place?  By no means. In both
cases, if you go through with it, the dying away of the first thrill will be
compensated for by a quieter and more lasting kind of interest. What is more
(and I can hardly find words to tell you how important I think this),  it is
just the people who are ready to submit to the loss of the thrill and settle
down to the sober interest, who are then  most likely to meet new thrills in
some quite different direction. The man who has learned to fly and becomes a
good  pilot will suddenly discover music; the man  who has  settled down  to
live in the beauty spot will discover gardening.
     This is, I think, one little part of what Christ meant by saying that a
thing will not really live unless it first dies. It is simply no good trying
to keep any thrill: that is the  very worst thing you can do. Let the thrill
go-let it  die away-go on through that  period  of  death  into the  quieter
interest and happiness that  follow -and you will find you are  living  in a
world of new thrills all the time. But if you  decide  to  make thrills your
regular diet and try to prolong them  artificially, they will all get weaker
and weaker, and fewer and fewer, and  you will be a bored, disillusioned old
man for the rest of your  life.  It is because so few people understand this
that you  find many  middle-aged  men and  women maundering about their lost
youth, at the very age when new horizons ought to be appearing and new doors
opening all round them. It is much better fun to learn to swim than to go on
endlessly (and hopelessly) trying to get  back the feeling you had when  you
first went paddling as a small boy.
     Another  notion  we get from novels and plays is that "falling in love"
is  something quite irresistible; something that just  happens to one,  like
measles. And  because they  believe  this,  some married people throw up the
sponge  and  give  in  when  they  find  themselves  attracted  by   a   new
acquaintance. But I  am inclined to think  that these  irresistible passions
are much rarer in real life than in books, at any rate when one is grown up.
When we  meet someone beautiful  and clever  and  sympathetic, of course  we
ought, in one sense, to admire and love these good qualities. But  is it not
very  largely in our own choice whether this love shall,  or shall not, turn
into what we call "being in love"? No doubt, if our minds are full of novels
and  plays and  sentimental songs, and  our bodies full of alcohol, we shall
turn  any love we feel into that kind  of love: just as if you have a rut in
your path all the rainwater will run into  that rut, and  if you  wear  blue
spectacles everything  you see  will turn  blue. But  that  will be  our own
fault.
     Before leaving the question  of divorce, I  should  like to distinguish
two  things which  are  very often  confused.  The  Christian conception  of
marriage  is  one:  the  other  is  the  quite  different  question-now  far
Christians,  if  they  are  voters or Members of Parliament, ought to try to
force their views of marriage on the rest of the community by embodying them
in the  divorce laws.  A great many  people seem to think that if you are  a
Christian yourself you should try to make divorce difficult for every one. I
do not think that. At least I know I should be very angry if the Mohammedans
tried to prevent the  rest of us from drinking wine. My own view is that the
Churches should frankly recognise  that the majority of the  British  people
are  not Christians  and,  therefore,  cannot be expected to live  Christian
lives. There ought to be two distinct kinds of marriage: one governed by the
State with rules enforced on all citizens, the other governed by the  Church
with rules enforced by her  on her own members. The distinction  ought to be
quite sharp,  so that  a man knows which  couples are married in a Christian
sense and which are not
     So much  for the Christian  doctrine  about the permanence of marriage.
Something  else, even more unpopular, remains  to  be dealt  with. Christian
wives promise to obey their husbands. In Christian marriage the man  is said
to  be the "head." Two  questions obviously arise here, (1) Why should there
be a head at all -why not equality? (2) Why should it be the man?
     (1) The  need  for some head  follows  from the  idea that marriage  is
permanent Of course, as long as the husband and wife are agreed, no question
of a head need arise; and we may hope that this will  be the normal state of
affairs in a Christian marriage. But when there is a real disagreement, what
is to happen? Talk it over, of course; but I am assuming they have done that
and still failed to reach agreement What do they do next? They cannot decide
by a  majority  vote,  for  in a council of two  there  can be  no majority.
Surely,  only  one  or other of  two things  can happen:  either  they  must
separate  and  go their own  ways or else  one or other of them must  have a
casting vote. If marriage is permanent, one or other party must, in the last
resort,  have the power of  deciding the  family policy.  You  cannot have a
permanent association without a constitution.
     (2) If there  must be a head, why the man? Well, firstly, is there  any
very serious  wish  that  it  should be the woman? As I have said,  I am not
married myself, but  as far as 1 can  see, even a woman who wants to be  the
head of her own house does not usually  admire the same state of things when
she finds it going on next door. She is much more likely to say "Poor Mr. X!
Why  he allows that appalling woman to boss  him about  the  way she does is
more than I can imagine." I do not think she is even very nattered if anyone
mentions the fact of her own "headship."  There must be something  unnatural
about the rule of wives over husbands, because the wives themselves are half
ashamed  of  it and despise  the husbands whom  they rule. But there is also
another  reason; and here I speak quite frankly as a bachelor, because it is
a  reason  you  can  see  from outside even  better  than  from inside.  The
relations of the family to the outer world-what might be  called its foreign
policy-must  depend, in the  last resort, upon the  man,  because he  always
ought to be, and  usually is, much more just  to  the  outsiders. A woman is
primarily fighting for her  own children and husband against the rest of the
world. Naturally, almost, in  a  sense, rightly,  their claims override, for
her, all  other  claims. She is the special trustee of their interests.  The
function of  the  husband is to see that this natural  preference of hers is
not given its head. He  has the last word in order  to  protect other people
from the intense family  patriotism of the wife. If anyone  doubts this, let
me ask a simple  question. If your dog has bitten the child next door, or if
your child has hurt the dog next  door,  which would you sooner have to deal
with, the master of that house or the mistress? Or,  if  you  are a  married
woman, let me ask you this question. Much as  you admire your husband, would
you not say  that his chief failing is his tendency not to  stick up for his
rights and yours against the neighbours as vigorously as you  would  like? A
bit of an Appeaser?
7. Forgiveness
     I said in a previous  chapter  that  chastity was the most unpopular of
the Christian virtues. But I am not sure  I was  right  I believe  the one I
have to  talk of  today  is even more unpopular:  the Christian  rule, "Thou
shalt  love thy  neighbour  as thyself." Because  hi Christian  morals  "thy
neighbour" includes  "thy  enemy," and so we  come  up against this terrible
duty of forgiving our enemies. Every one says forgiveness is  a lovely idea,
until they have something to forgive, as we had during the war. And then, to
mention the  subject at all is to be greeted with howls of anger.  It is not
that  people  think this too  high and  difficult a virtue: it is that  they
think it hateful and contemptible. "That sort of talk makes them sick," they
say. And half of you  already want to ask me, "I wonder how you'd feel about
forgiving the Gestapo if you were a Pole or a Jew?"
     So do I. I wonder very much. Just as when Christianity tells  me that I
must  not  deny my religion even  to  save myself from death  by torture,  I
wonder very much what I should do when it came to the point. I am not trying
to  tell  you in this book what I  could  do-I can do  precious  little-I am
telling  you what Christianity is. I did not invent it. And there, right  in
the  middle of it, I find "Forgive us our sins as we forgive  those that sin
against  us."  There  is  no  slightest   suggestion  that  we  are  offered
forgiveness on any other terms. It is made perfectly dear  that if we do not
forgive we shall not be forgiven. There are no  two  ways about it. What are
we to do?
     It is going to be hard enough, anyway, but I think there are two things
we can do to make  it easier. When you start mathematics  you  do  not begin
with the  calculus; you begin with simple  addition.  In the same way, if we
really want  (but all  depends on really wanting) to learn  how to  forgive,
perhaps  we  had better start  with something easier than  the  Gestapo. One
might start with forgiving one's husband or wife, or parents or children, or
the nearest N.C.O., for something they  have done or said in the last  week.
That will probably keep us  busy for the  moment. And secondly, we might try
to  understand exactly what loving  your neighbour as yourself means. I have
to love him as I love myself. Well, how exactly do I love myself?
     Now that I come to think of it,  I have  not  exactly  got a feeling of
fondness or  affection for myself,  and  1 do  not  even always enjoy my own
society. So  apparently  "Love your neighbour"  does not mean  "feel fond of
him" or "find him attractive." I ought to have seen that before, because, of
course, you cannot feel  fond of a person  by  trying. Do 1  think  well  of
myself, think myself  a nice chap?  Well, I  am afraid  I  sometimes do (and
those are, no doubt, my worst moments) but that is not why I love myself. In
fact it,  is the  other  way round: my self-love makes me think myself nice,
but thinking myself nice is not why I love myself. So loving my enemies does
not apparently mean thinking them nice either. That is an  enormous  relief.
For a good many people  imagine that forgiving your enemies means making out
that they are  really not such bad fellows after all, when it is quite plain
that they are. Go  a step further. In my most clear-sighted moments not only
do  I not think myself a nice man, but I know that  I am a very nasty one. I
can  look  at  some  of the things I have done with horror and loathing.  So
apparently I am allowed to loathe and hate some of the things my enemies do.
Now that I come to think of it,  I remember Christian  teachers  telling  me
long ago that I must hate a bad man's actions, but not hate the bad man: or,
as they would say, hate the sin but not the sinner.
     For  a  long  time I  used  to  think  this  a  silly,  straw-splitting
distinction:  how  could you hate what  a man did and  not hate the man? But
years later it  occurred to  me  that there was one man to whom  I  had been
doing  this all my  life-namely myself. However much  I might dislike my own
cowardice or conceit or greed, I went on loving myself. There had never been
the  slightest difficulty about it. In fact the very  reason why I hated the
things was that I loved the man. Just because I loved myself, I was sorry to
find  that I was  the  sort of  man  who  did  those  things.  Consequently,
Christianity does not want us to reduce by one  atom  the hatred we feel for
cruelty and treachery. We ought to hate them.  Not one word of  what we have
said about them needs to be  unsaid. But it does want us to hate them in the
same way in  which  we  hate things in ourselves: being  sorry that the  man
should have  done  such things, and  hoping, if it is anyway  possible, that
somehow, sometime, somewhere, he can be cured and made human again.
     The real test is this. Suppose one reads a story  of  filthy atrocities
in the paper. Then suppose that something turns up suggesting that the story
might not be quite true, or not  quite so  bad as it was made out. Is  one's
first feeling, "Thank  God, even they aren't quite so bad as that," or is it
a feeling of disappointment,  and even a determination to cling to the first
story for the sheer pleasure of thinking your enemies as bad as possible? If
it is the second then it is, I am afraid, the first step in a process which,
if followed to the end, will  make us into devils. You see, one is beginning
to  wish  that black was a little  blacker. If we  give that wish  its head,
later on we shall wish to see grey as black, and then to see white itself as
black. Finally, we shall insist on seeing everything-God and our friends and
ourselves  included-as bad, and not  be able to stop doing it:  we  shall be
fixed for ever in a universe of pure hatred.
     Now  a step further. Does loving your enemy mean not punishing him? No,
for  loving  myself does not  mean that  I ought not  to subject  myself  to
punishment-even to death. If one had committed a murder, the right Christian
thing to do would be to give yourself up to the police and be hanged. It is,
therefore, in my opinion, perfectly right for a Christian  judge to sentence
a  man  to death or  a Christian soldier  to  kill an enemy.  I always  have
thought so, ever since I became a Christian, and  long before the war, and I
still think so now that we are at peace. It  is no good quoting "Thou  shalt
not kill." There are two Greek words: the ordinary word to kill and the word
to murder. And when Christ quotes that commandment He uses the murder one in
all three accounts, Matthew, Mark, and Luke. And I am told there is the same
distinction in  Hebrew. All killing is  not murder  any more than all sexual
intercourse is  adultery. When soldiers came to St.  John the Baptist asking
what to do, he never  remotely suggested that  they ought to leave the army:
nor  did  Christ  when  He met a  Roman  sergeant-major-what  they called  a
centurion. The idea of the knight-the Christian in arms for the defence of a
good cause-is one of the great Christian ideas. War is a dreadful thing, and
I can respect an honest pacifist, though  I think he is  entirely  mistaken.
What I cannot understand is this sort of semipacifism you get nowadays which
gives people the idea that though you have to fight, you ought to do it with
a long face  and as if you were  ashamed of it. It is that feeling that robs
lots of magnificent young Christians in the Services of  something they have
a right to, something which is the natural accompaniment  of courage- a kind
of gaity and wholeheartedness.
     I have often thought to myself how it would have been if, when I served
in  the  first  world  war, I  and some young  German had killed  each other
simultaneously  and  found ourselves together a moment after death. I cannot
imagine that  either of  us  would  have  felt any  resentment or  even  any
embarrassment. I think we might have laughed over it.
     I imagine  somebody will say,  "Well,  if one is allowed to condemn the
enemy's acts, and punish him, and kill him,  what difference is left between
Christian morality and the ordinary  view?" All the difference in the world.
Remember,  we Christians think  man  lives  for ever. Therefore, what really
matters is  those little marks  or twists on the central, inside part of the
soul  which are  going  to turn  it, in the long run,  into  a heavenly or a
hellish creature.  We may kill if  necessary, but we must not hate and enjoy
hating. We may  punish  if necessary, but  we must  not enjoy  it.  In other
words,  something inside  us, the feeling of  resentment, the  feeling  that
wants to get one's own  back,  must  be simply  killed.  I do  not mean that
anyone can decide this moment  that he will never feel it any more. That  is
not how things happen. I mean that every time it bobs its head up, day after
day, year after year, all our lives long, we must hit  it on the head. It is
hard work, but the attempt is not impossible. Even  while we kill and punish
we must try to feel about the enemy as we feel about ourselves- to wish that
he were not bad. to hope that he may, in this world or another, be cured: in
fact, to wish his good.  That  is what is meant  in the Bible by loving him:
wishing his good, jot feeling fond of him nor  saving he  is nice when he is
not.
     I admit that  this means loving people who have nothing  lovable  about
them. But then, has oneself anything  lovable about  it? You love  it simply
because it is yourself, God  intends  us to love all selves in the same  way
and for the same reason: but He has given us the sum ready worked out on our
own case to show us  how it works. We have then to go on and apply  the rule
to all the other selves. Perhaps it makes it easier if we remember that that
is how He loves us. Not for any nice, attractive qualities we think we have,
but just because we  are  the things  called  selves.  For  really there  is
nothing  else in us to love: creatures like us who actually find hatred such
a pleasure that to give it up is like giving up beer or tobacco. ...
8. The Great Sin
     Today I come to that  part  of Christian  morals where they differ most
sharply  from  all  other morals.  There is one vice of which no man in  the
world  is  free;  which  every one  in the world loathes  when he sees it in
someone  else; and  of  which  hardly any  people, except  Christians,  ever
imagine that they are guilty themselves. I have heard people admit that they
are bad-tempered, or that they cannot keep their heads about girls or drink,
or  even  that they are cowards. I do not think I have ever heard anyone who
was not a Christian accuse himself of this vice. And at the same time I have
very seldom  met anyone, who was not  a Christian, who showed  the slightest
mercy  to it in others. There is  no fault which makes a man more unpopular,
and no fault which We are more unconscious of in ourselves. And the  more we
have it ourselves, the more we dislike it in others.
     The vice I  am  talking  of  is Pride or Self-Conceit: and  the  virtue
opposite to  it, in Christian morals,  is called Humility. You may remember,
when I was talking about sexual morality, I warned  you  that the  centre of
Christian morals  did not lie there. Well,  now, we have come to the centre.
According to Christian  teachers,  the essential  vice, the utmost  evil, is
Pride. Unchastity, anger, greed,  drunkenness,  and  all that, are mere flea
bites  in comparison:  it was through Pride that the devil became the devil:
Pride leads to every other vice: it is the complete anti-God state of mind.
     Does this seem  to you exaggerated? If so, think it over. I pointed out
a moment  ago  that the more pride one had, the more one  disliked pride  in
others. In fact, if you  want to find out how  proud you are the easiest way
is to ask yourself, "How much do I dislike  it when other people snub me, or
refuse to take any  notice of me, or shove their oar in, or patronise me, or
show off?"  The point it that each person's  pride  is  in  competition with
every  one else's pride. It is  because I wanted to be the big noise at  the
party that I am  so annoyed at someone else  being  the  big noise. Two of a
trade never  agree.  Now what  you  want  to  get  clear  is that  Pride  is
essentially  competitive-is competitive by its very nature-while  the  other
vices  are competitive only, so to speak, by accident Pride gets no pleasure
out of having something, only out of having more of it than the next man. We
say that people are  proud of being  rich,  or clever,  or good-looking, but
they are not  They are proud of being richer, or cleverer, or better-looking
than  others.  If  every  one  else  became  equally  rich,  or  clever,  or
good-looking there  would be nothing to be proud about. It is the comparison
that makes you proud: the pleasure of being above the rest. Once the element
of  competition has gone, pride has gone. That is  why I  say  that Pride is
essentially competitive in a way the other vices are not. The sexual impulse
may drive two men into competition if they both want the same girl  But that
is only  by accident; they might  just as  likely  have wanted two different
girls. But a proud man  will take your girl from you,  not because  he wants
her, but  just to prove to himself  that he is a better  man than you. Greed
may drive men into competition if there is  not enough to go  round; but the
proud  man, even when he has got more than he can possibly want, will try to
get still more just to assert his power. Nearly all those evils in the world
which people put down to greed or selfishness are really far more the result
of Pride.
     Take it with money. Greed will certainly make a man want money, for the
sake of a better house, better holidays, better things to eat and drink. But
only up to a point What is it dial makes a man  with  ?10,000 a year anxious
to get ?20,000 a year? It  is  not the greed for more pleasure. ?10,000 will
give all the luxuries that any man can really enjoy. It is Pride-the wish to
be richer than  some other rich man,  and (still more) the  wish  for power.
For, of course, power  is what Pride really enjoys: there is nothing makes a
man feel so  superior to others  as  being  able to move them about like toy
soldiers.  What  makes  a  pretty  girl spread misery  wherever she goes  by
collecting admirers? Certainly not her sexual instinct: that kind of girl is
quite often sexually frigid. It is Pride. What is it that makes  a political
leader or a whole nation go on and on, demanding more and more? Pride again.
Pride is competitive by its very nature: that is why it goes on and on. If I
am a proud man, then,  as long as there  is one  man in the whole world more
powerful, or richer, or cleverer than I, he is my rival and my enemy.
     The Christians are right: it is Pride which has been the chief cause of
misery in every nation  and  every family since the world began. Other vices
may  sometimes bring people together: you may find good fellowship and jokes
and friendliness among drunken people  or unchaste people.  But Pride always
means  enmity-it  is  enmity.  And not only enmity  between man and man, but
enmity to God.
     In  God  you  come  up  against  something  which  is in every  respect
immeasurably  superior  to  yourself.  Unless  you  know  God  as  that-and,
therefore, know yourself as nothing  in comparison-  you do  not know God at
all.  As  long as  you are proud you cannot know God. A proud man is  always
looking  down on  things and people: and, of  course, as  long  as  you  are
looking down, you cannot see something that is above you.
     That  raises a terrible question. How is it that people  who are  quite
obviously  eaten up with Pride  can  say they believe in God  and appear  to
themselves very  religious? I am  afraid it  means they  are  worshipping an
imaginary God.  They  theoretically admit themselves  to be  nothing  in the
presence of this phantom God,  but are really all  the time imagining how He
approves  of them and thinks them  far better than ordinary people: that is,
they pay a pennyworth of imaginary humility  to  Him  and get  out  of it  a
pound's worth of Pride towards  their  fellow-men. I suppose it was of those
people Christ was thinking when He said that some would preach about Him and
cast out devils in His name, only to be told at the end of the world that He
had never known them. And any of us may at any moment be in this death-trap.
Luckily,  we have a test Whenever  we find that our religious life is making
us feel  that we are good-above all,  that we are better than someone else-I
think we may  be  sure that we are  being acted on,  not by  God, but by the
devil  The  real test of being  in the presence  of  God is that you  either
forget about  yourself altogether  or see yourself as a small, dirty object.
It is better to forget about yourself altogether.
     It is a terrible thing  that  the worst of  all  the vices  can smuggle
itself  into the very centre of our religious life. But you can see why. The
other,  and  less bad, vices  come from the devil working on us  through our
animal nature. But  this does  not come through our animal nature  at all It
comes direct from Hell. It is  purely spiritual: consequently it is far more
subtle and deadly. For the same reason, Pride can often be used to beat down
the simpler vices. Teachers, in fact,  often appeal to a boy's Pride, or, as
they call it, his self-respect, to make him behave  decently: many a man has
overcome cowardice, or lust, or  ill-temper by learning to  think that  they
are beneath his dignity-that is, by Pride. The devil laughs. He is perfectly
content to see you becoming chaste  and brave and self-con trolled provided,
all the time,  he is setting  up in you the Dictatorship of Pride-just as he
would be quite content  to see your chilblains cured if he was  allowed,  in
return, to give you cancer. For Pride is spiritual  cancer:  it eats up  the
very possibility of love, or contentment, or even common sense.
     Before  leaving  this  subject  I  must  guard  against  some  possible
misunderstandings:
     (1)  Pleasure in being praised is not Pride. The child who is patted on
the back  for doing a lesson well, the woman  whose beauty is praised by her
lover, the saved soul to whom Christ says "Well done," are pleased and ought
to be. For here the pleasure lies not in what you are but in the  fact  that
you  have  pleased someone you wanted (and rightly  wanted)  to  please. The
trouble  begins when you pass from thinking,  "I have  pleased  him;  all is
well," to thinking, "What a fine person I must be to have done it." The more
you  delight in  yourself and the less you delight in the  praise, the worse
you are becoming. When you delight wholly in yourself and  do not care about
the praise  at all, you have reached the bottom. That is why vanity,  though
it is the sort of Pride which shows most on the surface, is really the least
bad  and most  pardonable  sort.  The  vain  person  wants praise, applause,
admiration, too much  and  is always  angling for  it. It is a fault,  but a
childlike and even (in an odd way) a humble fault. It shows that you are not
yet completely contented with  your own admiration.  You  value other people
enough to want them to look at you. You are, in fact, still human. The  real
black, diabolical Pride comes when  you look down on others so much that you
do not care what they think of you.  Of course, it is very right,  and often
our duty,  not to  care what people think of us, if we do  so  for the right
reason; namely, because we care  so incomparably  more what God  thinks. But
the Proud man has a different reason  for not  caring. He says "Why should I
care for  the  applause  of  that rabble  as  if their  opinion  were  worth
anything? And even if their opinions were of value, am  I the sort of man to
blush  with pleasure at a  compliment like some  chit of a girl at her first
dance?  No, I am  an integrated, adult personality. All I have done has been
done to satisfy my own ideals-or my artistic conscience-or the traditions of
my family- or, in a word, because I'm That Kind of Chap. If the mob like it,
let them. They're nothing to me." In this  way real  thoroughgoing Pride may
act  as a check on vanity;  for, as I  said a  moment ago, the  devil  loves
"curing"  a  small fault by giving you a great  one. We must try not  to  be
vain, but we must  never call  in our Pride  to  cure our vanity; better the
frying-pan than the fire.
     (2) We say in English that a man is "proud" of  his son, or his father,
or his school, or  regiment,  and it may  be  asked whether "pride" in  this
sense  is a sin. I think it depends on what, exactly, we mean by "proud of."
Very  often,  in  such  sentences, the phrase  "is  proud of" means  "has  a
warm-hearted admiration for." Such  an  admiration  is, of  course, very far
from being a sin. But it  might,  perhaps, mean that the  person in question
gives  himself airs on the ground of his distinguished father, or because he
belongs to a famous  regiment. This would,  clearly,  be a fault;  but  even
then,  it would  be better than being proud simply  of  himself. To love and
admire  anything  outside  yourself  is to  take  one step away  from  utter
spiritual ruin;  though we  shall not be  well so long as we love and admire
anything more than we love and admire God.
     (3)  We  must  not  think Pride is something  God forbids because He is
offended at it, or that  Humility is something He  demands as due to His own
dignity-as if God Himself  was  proud. He is not in the  least worried about
His  dignity. The  point is,  He wants you to know  Him; wants to  give  you
Himself. And He and you are two things of such a kind that if you really get
into any kind of touch  with  Him  you will, in fact, be  humble-delightedly
humble,  feeling the  infinite relief of having for once got rid of all  the
silly nonsense about  your  own  dignity  which  has  made you restless  and
unhappy all your life. He is trying to make you humble in order to make this
moment  possible: trying to take off a lot  of  silly, ugly, fancy-dress  in
which we have all got ourselves up and are strutting about  like the  little
idiots we  are. I wish  I had  got a bit further with humility myself: if  I
had, I could probably tell you more about the relief, the comfort, of taking
the fancy-dress off-getting rid of the false self, with all its "Look at me"
and  "Aren't  I a good  boy?"  and all its posing and posturing. To get even
near it,  even for  a moment, is like a drink of cold water  to  a man in  a
desert.
     (4) Do not imagine that if you meet a really humble man he will be what
most people call "humble" nowadays: he  will not be a sort of greasy, smarmy
person,  who is always telling you that, of course, he is  nobody.  Probably
all you will  think about him is that he seemed a cheerful, intelligent chap
who took a real interest in what you  said  to him. If you do dislike him it
will be because you feel  a little envious of anyone who seems to enjoy life
so easily. He will not be thinking about humility:  he will not be  thinking
about himself at all.
     If anyone  would like to acquire humility, I can, I think, tell him the
first step.  The  first step is to realise  that one is proud. And a biggish
step, too. At  least,  nothing whatever  can be done before it. If you think
you are not conceited, it means you are very conceited indeed.
9. Charity
     I said in an  earlier chapter that  there were  four "Cardinal" virtues
and three "Theological" virtues. The three Theological ones are Faith, Hope,
and Charity.  Faith is  going  to  be  dealt with  in the last two chapters.
Charity was partly dealt with in Chapter 7, but there I concentrated on that
part  of Charity which is  called Forgiveness.  I now want to add  a  little
more.
     First,  as to the meaning of  the word. "Charity" now means simply what
used  to be called "alms"-that is, giving to  the  poor. Originally it had a
much wider  meaning. (You can see how  it got the modern sense. If a man has
"charity," giving to the poor is one of the most obvious things he does, and
so people  came to talk as if that were the whole of charity.  In  the  same
way, "rhyme" is the  most obvious thing about poetry, and  so people come to
mean by "poetry" simply rhyme and nothing more.) Charity means "Love, in the
Christian  sense."  But love,  in  the  Christian  sense, does  not mean  an
emotion.  It is a state not  of the  feelings but of the will; that state of
the will  which we  have naturally about  ourselves,  and must learn to have
about other people.
     I pointed out in the chapter on Forgiveness that our love for ourselves
does not mean that we like ourselves. It means that we wish our own good. In
the  same  way  Christian Love (or  Charity)  for our  neighbours is quite a
different thing from liking or affection.  We "like" or  are "fond  of" some
people, and  not of others. It is important  to understand that this natural
"liking" is  neither  a  sin  nor a virtue,  any more  than  your likes  and
dislikes in  food are a sin or a virtue. It is just a fact  But,  of course,
what we do about it is either sinful or virtuous.
     Natural  liking  or  affection  for  people  makes   it  easier  to  be
"charitable" towards  them. It is,  therefore,  normally a duty to encourage
our affections-to "like"  people as much as we can  (just as it is often our
duty  to encourage our  liking for exercise or wholesome  food)-not  because
this liking is itself  the virtue of charity, but because it is a help to it
On  the  other hand, it is also  necessary to keep a very sharp look-out for
fear our liking  for some  one person makes us uncharitable, or even unfair,
to someone  else. There are even cases  where our liking  conflicts with our
charity towards  the person we like. For example,  a  doting  mother may  be
tempted by  natural affection to "spoil" her  child; that is, to gratify her
own affectionate impulses at the expense of the child's real happiness later
on.
     But though natural  likings should  normally be encouraged, it would be
quite wrong  to think that the way to become charitable  is to sit trying to
manufacture  affectionate feelings. Some  people are  "cold" by temperament;
that may be a misfortune for them, but it is no more a sin than having a bad
digestion is a  sin; and it does not cut them out from the chance, or excuse
them from the duty, of learning charity. The rule for all of us is perfectly
simple. Do  not waste time bothering  whether you "love" your neighbour; act
as if  you did. As soon as we do this we find one of the great secrets. When
you  are behaving  as if you loved someone, you will presently  come to love
him. If you injure someone you dislike, you will find yourself disliking him
more. If  you do him a good turn, you will find yourself disliking him less.
There is,  indeed, one exception. If  you do  him a good turn, not to please
God and obey the law of charity, but to show him  what a fine forgiving chap
you are, and to put  him  in  your debt, and then sit  down to wait  for his
"gratitude," you will  probably be disappointed. (People are not fools: they
have  a  very quick eye for  anything like showing off, or  patronage.)  But
whenever we do  good to  another self, just because it is a self, made (like
us) by God, and desiring its own happiness as we desire ours, we shall  have
learned to love it a little more or, at least, to dislike it less.
     Consequently,  though Christian  charity  sounds  a  very cold thing to
people  whose  heads  are full of sentimentality, and  though  it  is  quite
distinct from affection, yet it leads to affection. The difference between a
Christian and a  worldly man is not that the worldly man has only affections
or "likings" and the Christian  has only  "charity." The  worldly man treats
certain  people kindly because he  "likes"  them: the  Christian,  trying to
treat every one kindly, finds himself liking more and more people as he goes
on-including people  he could  not even have imagined himself liking  at the
beginning.
     This same spiritual  law works terribly in the opposite  direction. The
Germans, perhaps, at  first ill-treated the  Jews because they  hated  them:
afterwards they hated  them much more because they had ill-treated them. The
more cruel you are, the  more you will hate; and the more you hate, the more
cruel you will become-and so on in a vicious circle for ever.
     Good  and  evil both  increase at  compound interest.  That is  why the
little decisions you and I make every day are  of such infinite  importance.
The smallest good act today is the  capture of a strategic point from which,
a few months later,  you may be able to go on to victories you never dreamed
of. An apparently trivial indulgence in lust or anger today is the loss of a
ridge  or railway line or bridgehead  from  which the  enemy  may  launch an
attack otherwise impossible.
     Some writers use the word charity to  describe  not only Christian love
between human beings, but  also God's love for  man and man's love  for God.
About the second  of these two, people are often worried. They are told they
ought to love God. They cannot find any such feeling in themselves. What are
they to do? The answer is the same as before.  Act as if you did. Do not sit
trying to  manufacture feelings. Ask yourself,  "If I were sure that I loved
God, what would I do?" When you have found the answer, go and do it.
     On the whole, God's love for us is a much  safer subject to think about
than  our love for Him. Nobody can  always have devout feelings: and even if
we could, feelings are not what God principally cares about. Christian Love,
either towards  God  or  towards man, is an  affair of the will. If  we  are
trying to do His  will  we are obeying the commandment, "Thou shalt love the
Lord  thy  God." He will  give us feelings of love if  He pleases. We cannot
create them for  ourselves, and we must not  demand them as a right. But the
great thing  to remember is that, though our feelings come and go,  His love
for us  does not. It  is not wearied  by our sins, or our indifference; and,
therefore,  it  is  quite relentless in its  determination that we  shall be
cured of those sins, at whatever cost to us, at whatever cost to Him.
10. Hope
     Hope  is  one of the Theological virtues.  This means that a  continual
looking forward to the eternal world is not (as some modern  people think) a
form  of escapism or wishful thinking, but one of the things a Christian  is
meant to do. It does  not mean that we are  to leave the present world as it
is. If  you read history you will find that the  Christians who did most for
the present world were just those who thought  most of the next The Apostles
themselves, who  set  on foot the conversion of  the Roman Empire, the great
men who built up the Middle Ages, the English Evangelicals who abolished the
Slave  Trade, all left  their  mark on Earth, precisely because their  minds
were occupied with  Heaven.  It  is since  Christians have largely ceased to
think of the other world  that  they have become so ineffective in this. Aim
at Heaven and you will get  earth "thrown in": aim at earth and you will get
neither. It seems a strange rule, but something like it can be seen at  work
in other matters. Health is a great blessing, but the moment you make health
one of your  main, direct  objects you start becoming a crank and  imagining
there  is  something  wrong  with  you. You are  only  likely to get  health
provided  you want other things more -food, games,  work,  fun, open air. In
the same  way, we shall  never save civilisation as long as  civilisation is
our main object. We must learn to want something else even more.
     Most of us find it very difficult  to want "Heaven" at all-except in so
far as "Heaven" means meeting  again our  friends who  have died. One reason
for this difficulty  is  that we have  not been trained: our whole education
tends to fix our minds on this world. Another reason  is that when the  real
want for Heaven is  present in us,  we do  not recognise it Most  people, if
they had really learned to look  into their own hearts, would know that they
do want, and want acutely, something that cannot be had in this world. There
are all sorts of things in this world that offer to give it to you, but they
never quite keep their promise. The longings which arise in us when we first
fall in love, or first  think of some foreign country, or first take up some
subject  that excites  us,  are longings which no marriage,  no  travel,  no
learning,  can  really  satisfy.  I  am not now speaking of  what  would  be
ordinarily called unsuccessful marriages, or holidays, or learned careers. I
am speaking of the best possible ones. There was something we grasped at, in
that first moment of longing, which  just fades away in the reality. I think
everyone knows what I mean. The wife may be a good wife, and the  hotels and
scenery  may  have been excellent,  and chemistry may be  a very interesting
job:  but something  has evaded us. Now there are  two wrong ways of dealing
with this fact, and one right one.
     (1) The Fool's Way.-He puts the blame on the things themselves. He goes
on all  his life thinking that if only he tried another woman, or went for a
more expensive holiday, or whatever  it is, then, this time, he really would
catch  the  mysterious  something  we  are  all  after. Most of  the  bored,
discontented,  rich people in the  world are of this type.  They spend their
whole lives trotting from woman  to woman (through the divorce courts), from
continent to continent, from hobby to hobby, always thinking that the latest
is "the Real Thing" at last, and always disappointed.
     (2) The Way of  the Disillusioned "Sensible Man."-He soon decides  that
the whole thing was moonshine. "Of  course,"  he says, "one feels  like that
when one's young. But by the time you get  to my age you've given up chasing
the rainbow's end." And so he settles down and learns not to expect too much
and represses the part of himself which used,  as he would say, "to cry  for
the moon." This is, of course, a much better way than the first, and makes a
man much happier, and less of a  nuisance to society. It tends to make him a
prig (he is apt to be rather  superior towards what he calls "adolescents"),
but, on the whole,  he rubs along  fairly comfortably. It would be the  best
line  we could take  if man did not  live for  ever.  But supposing infinite
happiness  really is  there, waiting for us? Supposing one  really can reach
the rainbow's end? In that case it would be  a pity to find out too  late (a
moment  after death) that by our supposed  "common sense" we had  stifled in
ourselves the faculty of enjoying it.
     (3) The Christian Way.-The Christian says, "Creatures are not born with
desires unless satisfaction  for  those desires exists. A  baby feels hunger
well, there is such a  thing as food. A duckling  wants to swim: well, there
is such a thing as water. Men feel  sexual  desire: well,  there is  such  a
thing as sex. If I find in myself a desire which no experience in this world
can satisfy, the most probable explanation is  that I  was made for  another
world. If none of my earthly pleasures satisfy it, that  does not prove that
the universe is  a fraud.  Probably earthly pleasures  were  never  meant to
satisfy it, but only to arouse it, to suggest the real thing. If that is so,
I must take  care, on the  one hand, never to despise, or be unthankful for,
these earthly blessings, and  on the  other, never  to mistake them  for the
something else  of which they are only a kind of copy, or echo, or mirage. I
must keep alive in myself the desire for my true country, which I  shall not
find till after death; I must never let it get snowed under or turned aside;
I must make it the main object of life to press on to that other country and
to help others to do the same."
     There is no  need to be worried by facetious people who try to make the
Christian  hope of "Heaven" ridiculous by saying they do not want  "to spend
eternity playing harps."  The answer  to such people is that if they  cannot
understand books written for grown-ups, they should not talk about them. All
the scriptural imagery (harps, crowns, gold, etc.) is, of  course, a  merely
symbolical  attempt  to  express the inexpressible. Musical instruments  are
mentioned because for many people (not all) music is the thing known in  the
present life  which most strongly suggests ecstasy and  infinity. Crowns are
mentioned to suggest the fact that those who are united with God in eternity
share His  splendour and power  and joy. Gold  is  mentioned to suggest  the
timelessness of  Heaven (gold  does not rust) and  the  preciousness  of  it
People who take these symbols literally might as well think that when Christ
told us to be like doves, He meant that we were to lay eggs.
11. Faith
     I  must talk in  this chapter  about what the  Christians  call  Faith.
Roughly  speaking,  the  word Faith seems to be used by  Christians  in  two
senses or on two levels, and I will take them in turn. In the first sense it
means  simply  Belief-accepting  or  regarding  as  true  the  doctrines  of
Christianity. That is fairly simple. But what does puzzle people-at least it
used to puzzle me-is the fact that Christians  regard faith in this sense as
a virtue, I used to ask how on earth it can be a virtue-what  is there moral
or immoral about believing or not believing a set  of statements? Obviously,
I  used to say, a sane man accepts or rejects any statement, not  because he
wants  or does not want to,  but because the evidence  seems to him  good or
bad. If he were  mistaken about the goodness or badness of the evidence that
would not mean he was a bad  man, but  only that he was not very clever. And
if  he  thought the evidence bad  but  tried to force himself to  believe in
spite of it, that would be merely stupid.
     Well, I think I still take that view.  But what I did not see then- and
a  good many people do  not see still-was  this. I was  assuming that if the
human  mind once  accepts a  thing  as true  it  will  automatically  go  on
regarding it as true, until some real reason for  reconsidering it turns up.
In fact, I was assuming that the  human mind is completely ruled  by reason.
But that is not so.  For  example, my reason  is perfectly convinced by good
evidence  that  anaesthetics  do  not smother me and that  properly  trained
surgeons do  not start operating until I am unconscious.  But that  does not
alter  the  fact  that when they have me down on  the table  and clap  their
horrible mask over my face, a mere childish panic  begins inside me. I start
thinking I am going to choke, and I am afraid they will start  cutting me up
before I am properly under. In other words, I lose my faith in anaesthetics.
It is not reason that is taking away my faith:  on the contrary, my faith is
based on reason. It  is my imagination  and emotions. The battle  is between
faith and reason on one side and emotion and imagination on the other.
     When  you think of it you will  see lots  of instances of  this.  A man
knows, on perfectly good evidence, that a pretty girl of his acquaintance is
a liar  and  cannot keep a secret  and ought not to be trusted;  but when he
finds himself with her his mind loses its faith in that bit of knowledge and
he  starts thinking,  "Perhaps she'll be different this time," and once more
makes a fool of himself and tells  her something  he ought not to  have told
her. His senses  and  emotions  have destroyed  his faith in what  he really
knows to be true. Or take a boy learning to swim. His reason knows perfectly
well that an unsupported human body will  not necessarily sink in  water: he
has seen dozens of people float and swim. But the whole question is  whether
he  will be able to go on  believing this when the instructor takes away his
hand  and  leaves  him unsupported in the water-or whether he  will suddenly
cease to believe it and get in a fright and go down.
     Now  just  the same thing happens about  Christianity. I  am not asking
anyone  to accept  Christianity  if his best reasoning  tells  him that  the
weight of the evidence  is against it. That is not the  point at which Faith
comes in.  But supposing a  man's reason once decides that the weight of the
evidence is  for it.  I can tell that man what is going to happen  to him in
the next few weeks. There  will come a moment when there is bad  news, or he
is in trouble, or is living  among a lot of other people who  do not believe
it, and all at once his emotions will rise up and carry out a sort of  blitz
on his belief.  Or else there will come a moment when  he wants a  woman, or
wants to tell a lie, or feels very pleased with himself, or sees a chance of
making a little money in some  way that is not perfectly fair: some  moment,
in fact, at which it would be very convenient if Christianity were not true.
And once  again his  wishes  and desires will carry  out  a blitz. I am  not
talking of moments at  which any real new  reasons against Christianity turn
up.  Those have  to  be faced and that  is a different matter. I am  talking
about moments where a mere mood rises up against it.
     Now Faith, in the sense in which I  am here using the  word, is the art
of holding on  to things your  reason  has once accepted,  in spite of  your
changing moods. For  moods will change, whatever  view your  reason takes. I
know that by experience.  Now that I am a Christian I do have moods in which
the whole thing looks very improbable: but when I was an atheist I had moods
in which Christianity looked terribly probable. This rebellion of your moods
against your real self is going to come anyway. That  is why Faith is such a
necessary virtue: unless you teach your moods "where they  get off," you can
never  be either  a sound Christian  or  even a  sound atheist, but  just  a
creature dithering to  and  fro,  with  its beliefs really dependent  on the
weather and  the  state  of its digestion. Consequently one must  train  the
habit of Faith.
     The first  step is to recognise the  fact that  your moods change.  The
next is to make sure that, if you have once accepted Christianity, then some
of its main doctrines shall be  deliberately held before your mind  for some
time every day. That  is why daily  prayers and religious reading and church
going are  necessary parts of the Christian life. We have to be  continually
reminded  of  what  we  believe.  Neither  this belief  nor any  other  will
automatically  remain alive in the mind. It must be fed.  And as a matter of
fact,  if  you examined  a  hundred  people  who  had  lost  their faith  in
Christianity, I wonder how many of them would turn out to have been reasoned
out of it by honest argument? Do not most people simply drift away?
     Now I must turn to Faith in the second or higher sense: and this is the
most difficult thing I have tackled yet. I want to approach it by going back
to the  subject  of  Humility.  You may remember I said that  the first step
towards humility was  to  realise that one is proud. I want to  add now that
the next step  is to make  some serious attempt to  practise  the  Christian
virtues. A week  is not enough. Things  often  go  swimmingly for the  first
week.  Try six weeks. By that time, having,  as far as one can  see,  fallen
back completely or even fallen lower than the point one began from, one will
have discovered  some truths about oneself. No man knows how bad he  is till
he has tried very  hard to be good. A silly idea is current that good people
do not know what  temptation means. This is an  obvious lie. Only those  who
try to resist temptation know how strong it is. After all, you  find out the
strength of the German army by fighting  against  it, not by  giving in. You
find out the  strength of a wind by trying to walk against it,  not by lying
down. A man  who  gives in to temptation after five minutes simply  does not
know what it would have been like an hour later. That is why bad people,  in
one sense, know very little about badness. They have  lived a sheltered life
by  always  giving in.  We never find out the strength of  the evil  impulse
inside us until we  try to fight it: and Christ, because He was the only man
who never yielded to temptation, is also the only man who knows to the  full
what temptation means-the only complete realist.  Very well, then. The  main
thing  we learn from a serious  attempt to practise the Christian virtues is
that we fail. If  there was any idea that God had set us a sort of exam, and
that we might get good marks by deserving them, that has to be wiped out. If
there was any idea  of a sort  of bargain-any idea that we could perform our
side of the contract and thus put God in our debts so that it was up to Him,
in mere justice, to perform His side-that has to be wiped out.
     I think every one who has some vague belief in God, until he  becomes a
Christian, has the idea  of an exam,  or of a bargain in his mind. The first
result  of real Christianity is to blow that idea into  bits. When they find
it  blown  into bits, some  people think this means  that Christianity is  a
failure and give up. They seem to imagine that God is very simple-minded! In
fact,  of  course,  He  knows  all  about  this.  One  of  the  very  things
Christianity was designed  to do was to blow this idea to bits. God has been
waiting for  the moment at which you  discover that there is no question  of
earning a pass mark in this exam, or putting Him in your debt.
     Then comes  another discovery.  Every faculty  you have,  your power of
thinking or of moving your limbs from moment to moment, is given you by God.
If you devoted  every moment of  your whole life exclusively  to His service
you could not give Him anything  that was not in a sense His own already. So
that when we talk of a man doing anything for God or giving anything to God,
I will tell you what  it is really  like. It is like a small child going  to
its  father and  saying, "Daddy,  give  me  sixpence to buy you  a  birthday
present." Of course, the  father  does, and he  is pleased with the  child's
present. It is all very nice and proper,  but only an idiot would think that
the father  is sixpence to the good on  the transaction. When a man has made
these two discoveries God can really get to work. It is after this that real
life begins. The  man is awake now. We can now go on to talk of Faith in the
second sense.
12. Faith
     I want  to  start by  saying  something that I would like  everyone  to
notice  carefully.  It is this. If this chapter  means nothing to you, if it
seems to  be trying to answer questions you never asked, drop it at once. Do
not bother about  it  at all. There are certain things in Christianity  that
can be understood from the outside,  before you have become a Christian. But
there are a great many things that cannot be understood until after you have
gone a certain distance  along the Christian  road.  These things are purely
practical, though they do not look as if  they were. They are directions for
dealing with particular cross-roads and obstacles on the journey and they do
not make sense  until a man has reached those places. Whenever you find  any
statement in Christian writings which you can make nothing of, do not worry.
Leave it alone. There  will  come  a  day,  perhaps  years later,  when  you
suddenly see what  it meant If one could understand it now, it would only do
one harm.
     Of course all this tells against me as much as anyone else. The thing I
am going  to try to  explain in this  chapter  may be ahead  of me. I may be
thinking  I  have got there when I  have not.  I  can  only  ask  instructed
Christians to watch  very carefully, and tell me when I go wrong; and others
to take what I  say with a grain of  salt- as something offered, because  it
may be a help, not because I am certain that I am right.
     I am  trying to talk about Faith in the second sense, the higher sense.
I said last week that the question of Faith in this sense arises after a man
has tried his level best to  practise the Christian virtues, and found  that
he fails, and seen that even if he could he would only be giving back to God
what was already  God's  own. In other words, he  discovers  his bankruptcy.
Now, once  again, what  God cares  about is not exactly our actions. What he
cares about is that we should be creatures of a certain kind or quality- the
kind  of creatures He  intended us to  be-creatures  related to Himself in a
certain way.  I do not  add "and related to one  another  in a certain way,"
because  that  is included: if you are right with Him you will inevitably be
right with all your  fellow-creatures, just as if all the  spokes of a wheel
are fitted rightly  into  the hub and  the  rim they  are bound to be in the
right  positions to one another. And  as long as a man is thinking of God as
an examiner  who has set him a sort of paper to do, or as the opposite party
in a  sort of bargain-as long as he is thinking  of claims and counterclaims
between himself and  God-he is  not yet in the right relation to Him. He  is
misunderstanding  what he  is  and what God is.  And he cannot  get into the
right relation until he has discovered the fact of our bankruptcy.
     When I say  "discovered," I  mean really discovered: not simply said it
parrot-fashion. Of  course, any child, if given a  certain kind of religious
education, will  soon learn to say that we have nothing to offer to God that
is not already His own and that we find ourselves failing to offer even that
without keeping something back. But I am talking of really discovering this:
really finding out by experience that it is true.
     Now  we cannot, in that sense,  discover our failure to keep God's  law
except by trying our  very hardest (and then failing). Unless we really try,
whatever we say there will always be at the back  of our minds the idea that
if we try harder next time we shall succeed in being completely good.  Thus,
in one  sense,  the  road back to God is a road  of moral effort,  of trying
harder and harder. But in another sense it is not  trying that is ever going
to bring us home. All this trying  leads up to the vital moment at which you
turn  to  God and say, "You must  do this. I can't." Do not,  I implore you,
start asking  yourselves, "Have I reached that  moment?" Do not sit down and
start watching your own mind to see if it is  coming along.  That puts a man
quite on the wrong track. When the most important  things in our life happen
we quite often do not know, at the  moment, what is going on. A man does not
always say to himself,  "Hullo! I'm  growing up." It is  often only  when he
looks back  that he realises  what has  happened and recognises it  as  what
people call "growing up." You can see it even in  simple matters.  A man who
starts anxiously watching to see whether he is going to sleep is very likely
to remain wide awake. As well, the thing I  am talking of now may not happen
to every one in a sudden flash-as  it did to St Paul or Bunyan: it may be so
gradual  that no  one  could  ever point to  a  particular  hour  or even  a
particular year. And what matters is the nature of the change in itself, not
how we  feel while  it is happening.  It is the change from  being confident
about our own efforts to the state in which we despair of doing anything for
ourselves and leave it to God.
     I know the words "leave it to God"  can be misunderstood, but they must
stay for the moment. The sense in which a Christian leaves it to God is that
he puts all his trust in Christ: trusts that Christ  will somehow share with
him  the perfect human obedience which He carried out  from His birth to His
crucifixion:  that  Christ  will make the  man more  like Himself  and, in a
sense, make good his deficiencies.  In Christian language, He will share His
"sonship"  with us, will make us, like Himself, "Sons of God": in Book  IV I
shall attempt to analyse the meaning of those words a little further. If you
like to put it that way, Christ offers something for nothing: He even offers
everything for nothing.  In a  sense, the whole Christian  life consists  in
accepting that very  remarkable offer. But  the difficulty is  to reach  the
point of recognising that  all we  have done and can do is nothing. What  we
should have liked would  be for God to count our good  points and ignore our
bad ones. Again, in a sense, you may say that no temptation is ever overcome
until we stop trying to overcome it- throw up the sponge. But then you could
not  "stop trying" in the right  way and for the  right reason until you had
tried your very hardest. And, in yet another sense,  handing everything over
to  Christ does  not, of  course, mean that you  stop  trying.  To trust Him
means, of course,  trying to do all that He says. There would be no sense in
saying you trusted a person if you  would not take  his advice. Thus  if you
have really handed yourself over to Him, it must  follow that you are trying
to obey Him. But  trying  in a new way, a less  worried way. Not doing these
things in  order to be saved, but because He has begun  to save you already.
Not hoping to  get to  Heaven as  a  reward for your actions, but inevitably
wanting to  act  in a  certain  way because a first faint gleam of Heaven is
already inside you.
     Christians have often disputed as  to whether  what leads the Christian
home is good actions, or Faith in Christ. I have no right really to speak on
such a difficult question, but it does seem to me like asking which blade in
a  pair of scissors  is  most necessary.  A serious moral effort is the only
thing that will bring you to the point where you throw up  the sponge. Faith
in  Christ is the only thing to save you from despair at that point: and out
of that Faith in  Him  good  actions  must inevitably  come.  There are  two
parodies of the truth which different sets  of Christians have, in the past,
been  accused by other  Christians of  believing: perhaps they  may make the
truth clearer. One set were accused of  saying, "Good actions  are all  that
matters. The best good action is charity. The best kind of charity is giving
money. The best thing  to  give money  to  is  the Church.  So hand  us over
?10,000 and  we  will see  you through."  The answer  to  that  nonsense, of
course, would be that good  actions done for that motive, done with the idea
that  Heaven  can be  bought, would  not be good  actions at  all,  but only
commercial speculations. The other set were accused of saying, "Faith is all
that matters.  Consequently, if you have  faith, it doesn't  matter what you
do. Sin away, my lad, and have a good time and Christ will see that it makes
no difference  in the end." The answer to that nonsense is that, if what you
call your "faith" in Christ does not  involve taking the slightest notice of
what He says, then it is  not Faith at all-not faith or  trust in  Him,  but
only intellectual acceptance of some theory about Him.
     The Bible really seems to clinch the matter when it puts the two things
together into one amazing sentence. The  first  half is, "Work out  your own
salvation  with fear and trembling"-which looks as if everything depended on
us and  our good actions:  but the  second half goes on, "For it is  God who
worketh in you"- which looks  as if God did everything  and we nothing. I am
afraid  that is  the sort of thing we  come up against in Christianity. I am
puzzled, but I am not surprised. You see, we are  now trying to  understand,
and  to  separate into  water-tight compartments, what  exactly God does and
what man does  when God  and  man are working together. And,  of course,  we
begin by  thinking  it is like two men  working together, so  that you could
say, "He did this bit and I did that." But this way of thinking breaks down.
God is not like that. He is inside  you as well as outside: even if we could
understand  who  did  what,  I do not  think  human language  could properly
express it. In  the attempt to express it  different Churches  say different
things.  But you will find that even those who insist  most strongly  on the
importance of good actions tell  you  you  need Faith;  and  even those  who
insist most strongly on Faith tell you to do good actions. At any  rate that
is as far as I go.
     I think  all Christians  would agree  with me  if  I  said  that though
Christianity seems at first to  be all about morality, all  about duties and
rules  and guilt  and virtue, yet it leads  you on, out of  all  that,  into
something beyond. One has a glimpse of  a  country where they do not talk of
those things, except perhaps as a joke. Every one there is filled  full with
what  we  should call goodness as a mirror is filled with light But  they do
not call it goodness. They do not call it anything. They are not thinking of
it. They are too busy looking at the source from which it comes. But this is
near  the stage  where  the road passes over the rim  of our world. No one's
eyes can see very far beyond that:  lots of  people's eyes can  see  further
than mine.
     Everyone  has warned me not to tell you what I am  going to tell you in
this last book.  They  all say "the ordinary reader does  not want Theology;
give  him plain practical religion." I  have rejected their advice. I do not
think the  ordinary reader  is  such  a fool. Theology means "the science of
God," and I think any man who wants to think about God at all  would like to
have the clearest and most accurate ideas about Him which are available. You
are not children: why should you be treated like children?
     In a way I quite  understand why some people are put off by Theology. I
remember  once  when  I  had  been giving  a  talk  to  the  RA.F., an  old,
hard-bitten officer got  up and said, "I've no use  for all that stuff. But,
mind you,  I'm a religious man too. I know there's a God. I've felt Him: out
alone in the desert at night: the tremendous  mystery. And that's just why I
don't believe all your neat little  dogmas and formulas about Him. To anyone
who's met the real thing they all seem so petty and pedantic and unreal!"
     Now in a  sense I quite agreed  with that man.  I think he had probably
had a real experience of God in  the  desert.  And when he  turned from that
experience  to  the  Christian creeds, I think  he really was  turning  from
something real to something less real.  In the same  way,  if a man has once
looked at the Atlantic  from the beach,  and then goes and looks at a map of
the Atlantic, he also will be turning from something real  to something less
real: turning from real waves to a bit of coloured paper. But here comes the
point. The map is admittedly only coloured paper, but  there are  two things
you  have  to remember about  it. In the  first place,  it is  based on what
hundreds  and  thousands  of  people  have found  out  by  sailing the  real
Atlantic. In that way it  has behind it masses of experience just as real as
the one you could have  from the  beach; only, while yours would be a single
isolated glimpse, the map fits all those  different experiences together. In
the  second  place,  if  you want  to  go  anywhere,  the  map is absolutely
necessary. As long  as  you are  content with walks on  the beach,  your own
glimpses are far more fun than  looking at a map. But the map is going to be
more use than walks on the beach if you want to get to America.
     Now, Theology  is like the  map. Merely learning and thinking about the
Christian doctrines, if  you stop there, is less real and less exciting than
the sort  of thing my friend got  in the desert. Doctrines are not God: they
are only a  kind of map. But that map is based on the experience of hundreds
of people who really were  in touch with God-experiences compared with which
any thrills or  pious feelings you and I  are likely to  get on our own  are
very  elementary  and  very  confused. And  secondly, if you want to get any
further, you  must  use the map. You  see, what  happened to that man in the
desert may have been real, and was certainly exciting, but nothing comes  of
it. It leads nowhere. There is nothing to do about it In fact, that  is just
why  a vague  religion-all  about feeling God  in nature,  and so  on-is  so
attractive. It is all  thrills and no work; like watching the waves from the
beach. But you will not get to  Newfoundland  by studying  the Atlantic that
way, and you will not get eternal life by simply feeling the presence of God
in  flowers or music. Neither  will  you  get anywhere  by looking  at  maps
without going to sea. Nor will you be very safe if  you go to sea  without a
map.
     In  other words, Theology is practical: especially now. In Ac old days,
when there was less education and discussion, perhaps it was possible to get
on with  a very few simple ideas about God. But it  is not  so now. Everyone
reads, everyone hears things discussed.  Consequently,  if you do not listen
to Theology, that will not mean  that  you have no  ideas about God. It will
mean that you have a lot  of wrong ones-bad, muddled, out-of-date ideas. For
a great many of the ideas  about  God which  are  trotted out  as  novelties
today, are  simply  the ones which real  Theologians tried centuries ago and
rejected.  To   believe  in  the  popular  religion  of  modern  England  is
retrogression-like believing the earth is fiat.
     For when you get down  to it, is not the  popular  idea of Christianity
simply this: that Jesus Christ was a great moral teacher and that if only we
took his advice we might be able to  establish  a  better  social  order and
avoid another war? Now, mind you, that  is quite true. But it tells you much
less than  the  whole  truth  about  Christianity  and  it has no  practical
importance at all.
     It  is quite true  that if we  took Christ's advice we  should  soon be
living in a happier world. You need not even  go as far as Christ. If we did
all that Plato or Aristotle or Confucius told us, we should  get on  a great
deal better than we do. And so what? We never have followed  the  advice  of
the great  teachers. Why are we likely to begin now? Why  are we more likely
to  follow  Christ  than any of the  others? Because he  is the  best  moral
teacher? But that makes it even less likely that  we shall follow him. If we
cannot  take the elementary lessons, is  it likely we  are going to take the
most advanced one? If Christianity  only means one  more bit of good advice,
then Christianity is of no importance. There has been no lack of good advice
for the last four thousand years. A bit more makes no difference.
     But as soon as  you look at any real Christian writings,  you find that
they are talking about something quite different from this popular religion.
They say that Christ is the Son of God (whatever that  means). They say that
those who give Him  their confidence can also become Sons  of God  (whatever
that means). They say that His death saved  us from our sins (whatever  that
means).
     There  is no  good  complaining that  these  statements  are  difficult
Christianity  claims  to be  telling us about another world, about something
behind the  world we  can touch and  hear  and see. You may think  the claim
false;  but  if  it  were  true, what  it  tells us  would be  bound  to  be
difficult-at least as difficult as modern Physics, and for the same reason.
     Now the point in Christianity which gives us the greatest  shock is the
statement that by  attaching ourselves to  Christ, we  can  "become Sons  of
God." One asks "Aren't we Sons of God  already? Surely the fatherhood of God
is one of  the main Christian ideas?" Well, in a certain sense, no doubt  we
are sons of God already. I mean, God has brought us into existence and loves
us and looks after us, and in that way is  like a father. But when the Bible
talks  of our  "becoming" Sons of  God, obviously  it  must  mean  something
different. And that brings us up against the very centre of Theology.
     One  of  the creeds  says that Christ is the Son of God "begotten,  not
created"; and it  adds  "begotten by his Father before all worlds." Will you
please get it quite clear  that this has  nothing  to do  with the fact that
when Christ was born on earth as a man, that man was the son of a virgin? We
are not now thinking about the Virgin Birth. We are thinking about something
that happened before  Nature was created at all, before time  began. "Before
all worlds" Christ is begotten, not created. What does it mean?
     We  don't use the words  begetting or  begotten much in modern English,
but  everyone still  knows  what they mean. To beget is to become the father
of:  to create is  to make. And the difference is this. When  you beget, you
beget something of  the same kind as yourself. A man begets human babies,  a
beaver begets  little  beavers and a bird begets eggs which turn into little
birds. But when  you  make,  you make  something  of a  different  kind from
yourself. A bird makes a nest, a beaver builds a dam, a man makes a wireless
set-or he  may make  something more like himself than a wireless set: say, a
statue. If he is a clever enough carver  he may make  a statue which is very
like a man indeed. But, of  course, it is not a real man; it only looks like
one. It cannot breathe or think. It is not alive.
     Now that is the first thing to get clear. What God begets  is God; just
as  what man begets is man.  What God creates  is not God; just as  what man
makes is not man. That is  why men are not Sons of  God in  the  sense  that
Christ is. They may be like God in certain ways, but they are not things  of
the same kind. They are more like statues or pictures of God.
     A statue  has the shape of a man but  it is not alive. In the same way,
man has  (in a sense I am going to explain) the "shape" or  likeness of God,
but he has  not got the kind of  life  God has. Let us  take the first point
(man's resemblance to God)  first. Everything God has made has some likeness
to Himself. Space is like  Him in  its  hugeness: not that the  greatness of
space is the same  kind of greatness as God's, but it is a sort of symbol of
it, or a translation of it into non-spiritual terms. Matter is  like  God in
having energy: though, again, of course, physical energy is a different kind
of thing from the power of God. The vegetable world  is like Him because  it
is alive, and He is the "living God." But life, in this biological sense, is
not the same as the  life there is in God:  it is only  a kind of  symbol or
shadow  of it.  When we  come  on  to the  animals, we find  other  kinds of
resemblance  in  addition  to  biological life.  The  intense  activity  and
fertility of the insects, for  example, is a first  dim  resemblance to  the
unceasing activity and the creativeness of God. In the higher mammals we get
the beginnings of instinctive  affection. That is not  the same thing as the
love that exists in God: but it is like it-rather in the  way that a picture
drawn on a flat piece of  paper can nevertheless be "like" a landscape. When
we  come  to  man,  the  highest  of  the animals,  we  get  the  completest
resemblance to God which we know of. (There may be creatures in other worlds
who are more like God  than man is, but we  do not know about them.) Man not
only lives, but loves and reasons: biological life reaches its highest known
level in him.
     But what  man,  in  his natural condition,  has not  got, is  Spiritual
life-the  higher and different sort of life that exists in God.  We use  the
same word life for both: but  if you thought that both must therefore be the
same  sort  of  thing, that would be like thinking  that the  "greatness" of
space  and  the  "greatness" of  God  were  the  same  sort of greatness. In
reality, the  difference between  Biological  life and spiritual life  is so
important that  I  am  going to give them two distinct names. The Biological
sort which comes  to us through Nature, and  which (like  everything else in
Nature) is always  tending to run down and decay so that it can only be kept
up by incessant subsidies from Nature in the form of air, water, food, etc.,
is Bios. The Spiritual life  which is in  God from  all eternity, and  which
made the whole natural  universe, is Zoe. Bios has,  to  be sure, a  certain
shadowy or  symbolic resemblance  to  Zoe: but only  the sort of resemblance
there is between a photo  and  a  place, or  a statue  and a man. A  man who
changed from  having Bios  to having Zoe  would have gone through  as big  a
change as a statue which changed from being  a carved stone to being  a real
man.
     And that is precisely what Christianity is about. This world is a great
sculptor's  shop. We are the  statues and there is a  rumour going round the
shop that some of us are some day going to come to life.
2. The Three-Personal God
     The last chapter was about the difference between begetting and making.
A man begets a child, but  he only makes a statue. God begets Christ  but He
only makes men. But by saying that, I have  illustrated only one point about
God, namely, that  what God the Father begets is God, something of  the same
kind as Himself.  In that  way it  is  like a human father begetting a human
son. But not quite like it. So I must try to explain a little more.
     A good many  people  nowadays say,  "I believe in a  God, but not in  a
personal God."  They feel that the mysterious something which is behind  all
other things must be more than a person. Now the Christians quite agree. But
the Christians are the only  people who offer any idea of  what a being that
is beyond personality could be like.  All the other people, though  they say
that God is beyond personality, really think of Him as something impersonal:
that  is, as something less than personal. If you are looking  for something
super-personal,  something more than a person, then it is not  a question of
choosing between the Christian  idea and the other ideas. The Christian idea
is the only one on the market.
     Again, some people think that after this life, or perhaps after several
lives, human souls will be "absorbed" into God. But when they try to explain
what they  mean, they seem to be  thinking of our being absorbed into God as
one  material thing is absorbed into  another. They say it is like a drop of
water slipping into the sea.  But of course  that is the end of the drop. If
that  is what  happens to us, then being absorbed  is the same as ceasing to
exist. It is only the Christians who have any idea of how human souls can be
taken into the life of God and yet remain  themselves-in fact, be very  much
more themselves than they were before.
     I warned you that Theology is practical. The whole purpose for which we
exist is to be thus taken into the life of God. Wrong ideas about what  that
life is, will make it harder. And now, for a few minutes, I must ask  you to
follow rather carefully.
     You know  that in space  you can move in three  ways-to left or  right,
backwards or  forwards,  up or down.  Every direction is either one of these
three or a  compromise between  them. They are called the  three Dimensions.
Now notice this. If you are using only one dimension, you could draw only  a
straight line. If you are using two, you could draw a figure: say, a square.
And a  square is made up of four straight lines. Now  a step further. If you
have three dimensions, you can then build what we call a solid body, say,  a
cube-a thing like a dice or a lump of  sugar. And a  cube  is made up of six
squares.
     Do  you see the  point? A world of  one dimension would be  a  straight
line. In  a  two-dimensional world, you  still  get straight lines, but many
lines make  one  figure. In a three-dimensional world, you still get figures
but many figures make one solid body. In other words, as you advance to more
real and more complicated levels, you do not leave behind you the things you
found on  the simpler  levels:  you still  have them,  but  combined in  new
ways-in ways you could not imagine if you knew only the simpler levels.
     Now the Christian account of God involves just the same  principle. The
human  level is  a simple and  rather empty  level. On  the human level  one
person is one being, and any two persons are two separate beings-just as, in
two dimensions (say on a flat sheet of paper)  one square is one figure, and
any two squares are two separate figures. On the Divine level you still find
personalities; but up there you find them combined in new ways which we, who
do not live on that  level, cannot imagine. In God's dimension, so to speak,
you find  a being who is three Persons while remaining one Being,  just as a
cube is  six squares  while remaining  one cube. Of course we  cannot  fully
conceive a Being like that: just as,  if we were so  made that we  perceived
only  two dimensions in space we could never properly imagine a cube. But we
can  get a sort of faint notion of it. And when we do, we are  then, for the
first  time in  our  lives,  getting some positive idea,  however  faint, of
something super-personal-something  more  than a person. It  is something we
could never have guessed, and yet,  once we have been told, one almost feels
one ought to have been able to guess it because it fits in  so well with all
the things we know already.
     You  may ask, "If we cannot imagine a three-personal Being, what is the
good of talking about Him?" Well,  there isn't  any  good talking about Him.
The  thing that matters  is being  actually  drawn into  that three-personal
life, and that may begin any time -tonight, if you like.
     What I mean is this. An ordinary  simple  Christian  kneels down to say
his prayers.  He  is  trying to get  into  touch  with God. But if he  is  a
Christian he knows  that  what is prompting him to pray is also God: God, so
to speak, inside  him. But he also knows that all  his real knowledge of God
comes through Christ, the  Man  who  was  God-that Christ is standing beside
him, helping him to pray, praying for him. You see what is happening. God is
the thing to which he is praying-the goal he is trying to reach. God is also
the thing inside  him which is pushing him on-the motive power. God is  also
the road or bridge along which he is being pushed to  that goal. So that the
whole  threefold life of the  three-personal Being  is actually  going on in
that ordinary  little bedroom where an ordinary  man is saying his  prayers.
The man is being caught up into the higher kind of life-what I called Zoe or
spiritual life: he is being pulled  into God, by God,  while still remaining
himself.
     And that  is  how  Theology started. People already knew about God in a
vague way.  Then came a man who claimed to  be God; and yet he was  not  the
sort of man you could dismiss as a  lunatic. He made  them believe Him. They
met Him again after they had seen Him killed. And then, after they had  been
formed into  a  little society or community,  they found  God somehow inside
them as well: directing them, making  them able to do things they could  not
do before.  And when they worked  it all out  they found they had arrived at
the Christian definition of the three-personal God.
     This  definition is  not  something we have made up;  Theology is, in a
sense, experimental  knowledge.  It  is  the  simple religions that are  the
made-up ones. When  I say it is an experimental science "in a sense," I mean
that  it is like  the other experimental sciences in  some ways,  but not in
all. If you  are a geologist studying  rocks,  you  have to go and  find the
rocks.  They  will not  come to you, and if you go to them  they  cannot run
away.  The initiative lies  all on your side.  They  cannot  either  help or
hinder.  But  suppose you  are a zoologist and want  to take  photos of wild
animals in their native haunts. That is a bit different from studying rocks.
The wild animals  will  not come to  you:  but they can run  away from  you.
Unless you keep  very  quiet, they will. There  is  beginning to be  a  tiny
little trace of initiative on their side.
     Now a stage higher; suppose you want to get to know a human  person. If
he is  determined not to let you, you will not  get to know him. You have to
win his confidence. In this  case the initiative is equally divided-it takes
two to make a friendship.
     When  you come to knowing God, the  initiative lies on  His side. If He
does not show Himself, nothing you can do will enable you to  find Him. And,
in fact, He shows much more of  Himself to some people  than  to  others-not
because  He has  favourites, but because it  is  impossible for Him  to show
Himself to a man whose whole  mind and character are in the wrong condition.
Just  as  sunlight,  though it has  no favourites, cannot be reflected  in a
dusty mirror as clearly as a clean one.
     You can put this another way by saying that while in other sciences the
instruments you use are things external to yourself (things like microscopes
and telescopes),  the instrument through which  you  see God  is  your whole
self. And if  a man's self is not kept clean and  bright, his glimpse of God
will be  blurred-like the Moon seen through a  dirty telescope. That  is why
horrible nations  have  horrible religions:  they have been looking  at  God
through a dirty lens.
     God can show Himself as He really  is only to  real men. And that means
not  simply  to  men who are  individually good,  but to  men who are united
together in  a body, loving one another, helping one another, showing Him to
one another. For that is what God meant humanity to be like; like players in
one band, or organs in one body.
     Consequently,  the one really adequate instrument  for  learning  about
God,  is the whole Christian community, waiting for Him  together. Christian
brotherhood is, so  to speak, the  technical equipment  for this science-the
laboratory outfit That is why all these people  who  turn up every few years
with some patent simplified religion of  their  own as a substitute  for the
Christian  tradition  are  really  wasting  time.  Like  a man  who  has  no
instrument but an old parr of field glasses setting out to put all  the real
astronomers right.  He may be a clever chap-he may be cleverer than some  of
the real astronomers, but he is not  giving himself  a chance. And two years
later everyone has forgotten  all about him,  but the real science is  still
going on.
     If Christianity  was something we  were making up,  of course  we could
make it easier. But it is not. We cannot compete, in simplicity, with people
who are inventing religions.  How could we?  We  are dealing  with  Fact. Of
course anyone can be simple if he has no facts to bother about.
3. Time And Beyond Time
     It is a very silly idea that in reading  a book  you must never "skip."
All sensible people skip freely when they come to a chapter which they  find
is going to  be no use to them. In  this  chapter  I am  going to talk about
something which may be helpful to some readers, but which may seem to others
merely  an  unnecessary complication. If you are  one of the second sort  of
readers,  then I advise you not  to  bother about this chapter at all but to
turn on to the next.
     In the last chapter I had to touch  on the subject of prayer, and while
that  is still fresh in  your mind and  my own, I should like to deal with a
difficulty that  some people find about the whole idea of prayer. A man  put
it  to me  by saying  "I can believe in God  all  right, but  what  I cannot
swallow is the idea of Him attending to several hundred million human beings
who are all addressing Him at  the same moment." And I have found that quite
a lot of people feel this.
     Now, the first thing to notice  is that the whole sting of it comes  in
the words at the same moment.  Most  of us can imagine God  attending to any
number of applicants if only they came one by one and He had an endless time
to do it in. So what is really at the back of this difficulty is the idea of
God having to fit too many things into one moment of time.
     Well that is of course what happens to us. Our life comes to  us moment
by moment One moment disappears  before  the next  comes along: and there is
room for very little in each. That is what  Time  is like. And of course you
and I tend to take it for granted  that this Time series-this arrangement of
past, present and future-is not simply  the way life comes to us but the way
all  things really exist We tend to assume that  the  whole universe and God
Himself are  always moving on from past  to future just as we  do.  But many
learned men do not agree with that. It was the Theologians who first started
the idea that some  things are  not in  Time  at all: later the Philosophers
took it over: and now some of the scientists are doing the same.
     Almost certainly  God  is  not in  Time. His life  does not consist  of
moments following  one another. If  a million  people are praying to  Him at
ten-thirty tonight,  He  need not  listen  to  them  all in that  one little
snippet which we call ten-thirty. Ten-thirty-and every other moment from the
beginning of  the world-is always the Present for Him. If you like to put it
that  way,  He has all eternity in  which to  listen to the split  second of
prayer put up by a pilot as his plane crashes in flames.
     That is difficult, I know.  Let me try to give something, not the same,
but a bit like it. Suppose I am writing a novel. I write "Mary laid down her
work; next moment came a knock at the door!" For Mary who has to live in the
imaginary  time of my story  there is no  interval between  putting down the
work and hearing the knock. But I, who am  Mary's maker, do not live in that
imaginary time at all. Between writing the first half  of  that sentence and
the  second, I might sit down for three hours and think steadily about Mary.
I could think about Mary as if she were the  only character in the  book and
for as long as I pleased, and the hours I spent in doing so would not appear
in Mary's time (the time inside the story) at all.
     This is not a perfect  illustration, of course. But it may give  just a
glimpse of what I believe  to be  the truth. God is not hurried along in the
Time-stream of this universe any more than an author is hurried along in the
imaginary  time of his own novel He has infinite attention to spare for each
one of  us. He does not have  to deal  with us in the mass.  You are as much
alone  with Him as if you were the  only  being He  had  ever created.  When
Christ died,  He died for you individually just as much  as  if you had been
the only man in the world.
     The way in  which my illustration breaks down is this. In it the author
gets out of one Time-series (that of the novel)  only  by going into another
Time-series  (the  real one).  But  God,  I  believe,  does  not live  in  a
Time-series at all. His life is not dribbled out moment by moment like ours:
with Him it is,  so to speak,  still 1920 and already 1960. For  His life is
Himself.
     If you picture Time as  a straight line along which we  have to travel,
then you must picture God as the whole page on which the  line  is drawn. We
come to the parts  of the line one by one: we have  to leave A behind before
we get to B, and  cannot reach C until we leave B behind. God, from above or
outside or all round, contains the whole line, and sees it all.
     The idea is worth  trying  to grasp because it  removes  some  apparent
difficulties  in  Christianity.  Before  I  became  a  Christian  one of  my
objections was as follows.  The  Christians said that the eternal God who is
everywhere and keeps the whole  universe going,  once became a human  being.
Well  then, said I, how  did the  whole universe keep  going while He was  a
baby, or while He was asleep? How could He at the same time be God who knows
everything  and also a man asking his  disciples "Who  touched me?" You will
notice that  the sting lay in  the time  words: "While  He was a  baby"-"How
could He at the same time?" In other words I was assuming that Christ's life
as God  was in time, and that  His  life as the man Jesus in Palestine was a
shorter period taken out of that  time-just as my service in  the army was a
shorter period  taken  out  of my total life.  And  that is how  most of  us
perhaps tend to think about it.  We picture God living through a period when
His human life was still in  the future: then coming to a period when it was
present: then  going  on  to a period when  He could  look  back  on  it  as
something in the past. But probably these ideas correspond to nothing in the
actual  facts.  You cannot  fit Christ's earthly life  in Palestine into any
time-relations with His life as God beyond all space and time. It is really,
I  suggest,  a timeless  truth about  God that human nature,  and  the human
experience of weakness and sleep and ignorance, are somehow included in  His
whole divine  life.  This  human life  in  God is  from our  point of view a
particular period in  the history of our world (from  the year A.D. one till
the Crucifixion). We therefore imagine it is also a period in the history of
God's  own  existence.  But God  has  no  history. He is too completely  and
utterly real to  have one. For, of  course,  to have a  history means losing
part of your reality (because it had already slipped away into the past) and
not  yet  having another part  (because it is still in the  future): in fact
having nothing but  the tiny  little  present, which has gone before you can
speak about it. God forbid we should think God was  like that.  Even  we may
hope not to be always rationed in that way.
     Another difficulty  we get if we believe God  to  be  in time  is this.
Everyone  who believes in God at all believes that He knows what  you and  I
are  going  to do  tomorrow. But if He knows I am going to do so-and-so, how
can  I be free to do otherwise? Well, here once again,  the difficulty comes
from thinking  that God is progressing along the Time-line like us: the only
difference being  that He can see ahead and we cannot.  Well,  if that  were
true, if God  foresaw our acts,  it would be very hard  to understand how we
could be  free not  to  do  them. But suppose  God is outside and above  the
Time-line. In that case, what we call  "tomorrow" is visible to  Him in just
the same way as what  we call "today."  All the days  are "Now" for Him.  He
does not remember you doing things yesterday; He simply sees you doing them,
because, though you have lost yesterday. He has  not. He does not  "foresee"
you doing  things tomorrow;  He simply sees you doing  them: because, though
tomorrow  is not yet  there for you, it is for Him.  You never supposed that
your actions at this moment were any less  free because God  knows what  you
are  doing.  Well,  He  knows  your  tomorrow's  actions  in just  the  same
way-because He  is already in tomorrow and can simply watch you. In a sense,
He does not know your action  till you have done it: but then the moment  at
which you have done it is already "Now" for Him.
     This idea  has helped me a good deal. If it does not help you, leave it
alone. It is a "Christian idea" in the sense that great  and wise Christians
have  held it and there is nothing in it contrary to Christianity. But it is
not in the Bible or any of the creeds. You can be a perfectly good Christian
without accepting it, or indeed without thinking of the matter at all
4. Good Infection
     I  begin this chapter by asking you to  get a  certain picture clear in
your  minds. Imagine  two books lying  on a table  one on  top of the other.
Obviously the bottom  book is  keeping the other one up-supporting it. It is
because of the underneath book that the top one is resting, say,  two inches
from the surface of the table instead of touching the table. Let us call the
underneath  book  A  and the top  one B.  The position  of  A is causing the
position of B. That is clear? Now let us imagine-it could not really happen,
of course, but it will do for an illustration-let us imagine that both books
have  been in that position  for  ever and ever. In  that  case B's position
would  always have  been resulting from A's position.  But all the same, A's
position  would  not have existed  before B's position.  In other  words the
result does not come after the cause. Of course, results usually do: you eat
the  cucumber  first  and have the  indigestion afterwards. But it is not so
with all causes,  and  results. You  will see in  a  moment why I think this
important.
     I said  a few  pages  back  that God  is a  Being  which contains three
Persons while remaining one Being, just as a cube contains six squares while
remaining one  body. But as  soon  as I begin  trying  to  explain how these
Persons  are connected I have to use words which make it sound as if  one of
them was there before the  others. The First Person is called the Father and
the Second the Son. We say  that the First begets or produces the second; we
call it begetting, not making, because what He produces is  of the same kind
as  Himself.  In  that way the word Father  is  the only  word to  use.  But
unfortunately  it suggests  that  He  is there first-just as a human  father
exists before  his son. But that is  not so. There  is  no before and  after
about it. And that  is why I have spent some time  trying  to make clear how
one  thing can be the source, or cause, or origin,  of another without being
there before  it. The Son  exists because the Father exists: but there never
was a tune before the Father produced the Son.
     Perhaps the best way  to think of it  is this.  I asked you just now to
imagine those two books, and probably most of you  did. That is, you made an
act of imagination and as a result you had a mental picture. Quite obviously
your act of  imagining was the cause and the mental picture  the result. But
that does not  mean  that  you  first  did  the  imagining and then got  the
picture. The moment you did it, the picture was there. Your will was keeping
the picture before  you all  the time.  Yet that act of will and the picture
began at exactly the same moment and ended at the same moment. If there were
a  Being who had always existed and had always been imagining one thing, his
act would always have been producing a mental picture; but the picture would
be just as eternal as the act.
     In the same way we must think of the Son always, so to speak, streaming
forth from  the  Father, like  light from a lamp, or heat  from a  fire,  or
thoughts  from  a  mind.  He is the  self-expression  of the Father-what the
Father has to say. And there never was a time when He was not saying it. But
have you noticed what is happening? All these  pictures of light or heat are
making it  sound  as if the  Father and Son were  two things  instead of two
Persons. So that after all, the New Testament picture of  a Father and a Son
turns out to be much more accurate than anything we try to substitute for it
That is what always happens when you go away from the words of the Bible. It
is  quite right to go away  from them for  a moment  in  order  to make some
special point clear. But you must always go back. Naturally God knows how to
describe Himself much better than we know how to describe Him. He knows that
Father and Son is  more like  the  relation  between  the First  and  Second
Persons than anything else we can think of. Much the most important thing to
know  is that  it is a relation of love. The Father delights in His Son; the
Son looks up to His Father.
     Before going on, notice the practical importance  of this. All sorts of
people are fond of repeating the Christian statement that "God is love," But
they seem  not  to notice that the words "God is love" have  no real meaning
unless God contains at least two Persons. Love  is something that one person
has for another person. If  God was  a single person, then before the  world
was made, He was not love. Of course, what these people mean  when  they say
that God is love is often something quite different: they really  mean "Love
is God."  They really mean that  our feelings of love,  however and wherever
they arise,  and whatever results they produce, are to be treated with great
respect. Perhaps they are: but  that is something quite different from  what
Christians mean  by  the  statement "God is  love."  They  believe that  the
living, dynamic activity of love has been going  on in  God for ever and has
created everything else.
     And that, by the  way, is perhaps the most important difference between
Christianity and  all other  religions:  that  in Christianity God is not  a
static thing-not  even  a  person-but a dynamic, pulsating activity, a life,
almost a kind  of drama. Almost, if you will not think me irreverent, a kind
of dance. The union between the Father and Son is such a live concrete thing
that   this  union  itself  is  also  a  Person.  I  know   this  is  almost
inconceivable, but look at it  thus. You know that among human beings,  when
they  get together in a family,  or  a club, or  a trade union,  people talk
about the "spirit" of that family, or club, or trade union. They talk  about
its "spirit"  because  the individual  members, when  they  are together, do
really  develop particular ways of talking and behaving which they would not
have if they were apart. (*)
     It  is  as  if a sort of  communal personality came into existence.  Of
course, it is not a real  person:  it is only rather like a person. But that
is just one of the  differences between God  and us. What  grows out of  the
joint life of the Father and Son is a real Person, is  in  fact the Third of
the three Persons who are God.
     This third Person is called, in  technical language, the Holy Ghost  or
the "spirit" of God. Do not be worried or surprised if  you find it (or Him)
rather vaguer or more shadowy in your mind than the other two. I think there
is a  reason why that must be so. In the Christian  life you are not usually
looking at Him: He is always acting through you. If you think  of the Father
as something "out  there,"  in  front of you,  and  of the  Son  as  someone
standing at your side, helping you to pray, trying to turn you  into another
son, then you have to think of the third Person as something  inside you, or
behind you. Perhaps some people might find it easier to begin with the third
Person  and  work  backwards.  God is  love,  and  that  love  works through
men-especially through the whole community of Christians. But this spirit of
love is, from all eternity, a love going on between the Father and Son.
     And now, what does it all matter? It matters more than anything else in
the world. The whole dance, or drama, or pattern of this three-Personal life
is  to be played out in each one of  us: or (putting it the other way round)
each one of us has got to  enter that pattern, take his place in that dance.
There is no other way to  the happiness for which we were made. Good  things
as well  as bad, you know, are caught by a kind of infection. If you want to
get warm you must  stand near the fire:  if you want to be  wet you must get
into the water. If you want joy,  power, peace,  eternal life, you must  get
close to, or  even into, the  thing that has  them. They are not  a  sort of
prizes which God could, if He chose, just hand  out to anyone.  They  are  a
great  fountain of energy and  beauty  spurting up at  the  very  centre  of
reality. If you are dose to it, the spray will  wet you: if you are not, you
will remain dry. Once a man is united to God, how could he not live forever?
Once a man is separated from God, what can he do but wither and die?
     But  how  is  he to be united  to God? How is it possible  for us to be
taken into the three-Personal life?
     You remember what I said in Chapter II about  begetting  and making. We
are not  begotten by God, we  are only made by Him: in our  natural state we
are  not  sons  of God, only (so to speak)  statues. We have  not got Zoe or
spiritual life: only Bios or biological life which is presently going to run
down and die. Now the whole offer  which Christianity makes is this: that we
can, if we let God have His way, come to share  in the life of Christ. If we
do, we shall  then be  sharing a life  which  was begotten,  not made, which
always has  existed and  always will exist Christ  is the Son of God. If  we
share in this kind of  life we also shall be sons of God.  We shall love the
Father as He does and the Holy Ghost will arise in us. He came to this world
and became  a man in order to spread to other men the kind of life He has-by
what I call "good infection." Every Christian is to become a little  Christ.
The whole purpose of becoming a Christian is simply nothing else.
5. The Obstinate Toy Soldiers
     The Son of God  became a man to enable men to become sons of God. We do
not  know-anyway,  I  do not know-how things would have worked if the  human
race had  never rebelled against God and joined the enemy. Perhaps every man
would have been "in Christ," would have  shared the life of the Son of  God,
from  the moment he  was born. Perhaps the  Bios or natural  life would have
been  drawn up into the Zoe, the uncreated life, at once and as a matter  of
course. But that is guesswork. You and I  are concerned  with the way things
work now.
     And the present state of things is this. The two kinds of life are  now
not only different  (they would always have been that) but actually opposed.
The  natural life  in each of us is something self-centred,  something  that
wants to be petted and admired, to take advantage of other lives, to exploit
the whole universe. And especially it wants to be  left to  itself: to  keep
well away from anything better or stronger or higher  than it, anything that
might make it feel small. It is afraid of the light and air of the spiritual
world, just as people who have been  brought  up to be dirty are afraid of a
bath. And in a sense it is quite right It knows that  if the  spiritual life
gets hold  of it,  all its  self-centredness  and self-will  are going to be
killed and it is ready to fight tooth and nail to avoid that
     Did you ever think, when you were a child, what fun it would be if your
toys could come to life? Well suppose you  could really have brought them to
life. Imagine turning a tin soldier into a real little man. It would involve
turning the tin  into flesh. And suppose the tin soldier did  not like it He
is not interested  in flesh;  all he sees is that the tin is being spoilt He
thinks you are killing him. He will do everything  he can to prevent you. He
will not be made into a man if he can help it.
     What you would have done about that tin soldier I do not know. But what
God did about us was this.  The Second Person in God, the Son, became  human
Himself: was born into the world as an actual man-a real man of a particular
height, with  hair of a  particular  colour, speaking a particular language,
weighing  so many  stone.  The Eternal Being, who knows  everything  and who
created the whole universe, became not only a man but (before  that) a baby,
and before that a foetus inside a Woman's body.  If you want to get the hang
of it, think how you would like to become a slug or a crab.
     The result of this was that you now had one man who really was what all
men were intended to be: one man in whom the created  life, derived from his
Mother,  allowed  itself to  be  completely  and  perfectly turned into  the
begotten life. The natural human creature in Him was taken up fully into the
divine  Son. Thus in one instance  humanity had,  so to  speak, arrived: had
passed into the life of Christ.  And because the whole  difficulty for us is
that  the natural life has to be, in a sense,  "killed," He chose an earthly
career  which   involved  the   killing  of  His  human  desires   at  every
turn-poverty, misunderstanding  from His own family, betrayal by  one of His
intimate  friends,  being  jeered  at  and  manhandled by  the  Police,  and
execution by torture. And then, after  being thus killed-killed every day in
a sense-the human creature in  Him, because it was united to the divine Son,
came to life again. The Man in  Christ rose again: not only the God. That is
the whole point For the  first time we saw a real man. One tin  soldier-real
tin, just like the rest-had come fully and splendidly alive.
     And  here, of course, we come to the point where  my illustration about
the tin soldier breaks down. In the case of real toy soldiers or statues, if
one  came to life, it would obviously  make  no difference to the rest. They
are  all separate. But human beings  are not. They look separate because you
see diem walking about separately. But then, we are  so made that we can see
only  the present  moment. If we could see the past, then of course it would
look different. For there was a time when every man  was part of his mother,
and (earlier still) part of his  father as well: and when they  were part of
his grandparents. If you could see humanity spread out in time, as  God sees
it, it  would not look like a lot of separate things dotted about. It  would
look  like  one single growing thing-  rather like a  very complicated tree.
Every individual would appear connected with every other. And not only that.
Individuals are not really separate from God any more than from one another.
Every man, woman, and child  all over the world is  feeling and breathing at
this moment only because God, so to speak, is "keeping him going."
     Consequently, when Christ becomes man it  is not really as if you could
become one particular  tin soldier. It  is as if  something  which is always
affecting  the whole human mass begins, at one point,  to  affect that whole
human  mass in  a  new way. From that  point the effect  spreads through all
mankind. It makes a difference to people who lived before  Christ as well as
to  people who lived after  Him.  It makes  a  difference to people who have
never heard of Him. It  is  like dropping into a glass of water one drop  of
something which gives a new taste or a  new colour to the whole lot. But, of
course, none of these illustrations really  works perfectly. In the long run
God is no one  but Himself and what He does is like nothing else.  You could
hardly expect it to be.
     What,  then, is the  difference  which  He has made to the whole  human
mass? It is just this; that the business of becoming a son of God, of  being
turned from  a created thing into a begotten thing, of passing over from the
temporary biological life into timeless "spiritual" life, has been done  for
us.  Humanity  is  already  "saved" in  principle. We  individuals  have  to
appropriate that salvation. But the  really tough work-the bit we  could not
have  done for  ourselves-has been  done  for us. We have not  got to try to
climb  up into spiritual life  by our own  efforts; it has already come down
into the human race. If we will  only lay  ourselves open to the one  Man in
whom it was fully  present, and  who, in  spite of being God, is also a real
man,  He will  do it in  us and for  us. Remember what  I said  about  "good
infection." One of our own race has this new life: if we get close to Him we
shall catch it from Him.
     Of course, you can express this in all sorts of different ways. You can
say that Christ died for our  sins. You may say that the Father has forgiven
us because Christ has done for us what  we ought to  have done. You may  say
that we are  washed in the blood  of  the Lamb. You may say that  Christ has
defeated death. They  are  all true. If any of them do not  appeal  to  you,
leave it alone and get on with the formula that does. And, whatever you  do,
do not start  quarrelling with other people because  they  use  a  different
formula from yours.
6. Two Notes
     In order  to avoid  misunderstanding I  here add  notes  on  two points
arising out of the last chapter.
     (1) One sensible critic wrote asking me why, if God wanted sons instead
of "toy soldiers," He did not beget many sons at the outset instead of first
making toy soldiers and  then bringing them to life by such a difficult  and
painful process. One part of the answer to this question is fairly easy: the
other  part is probably beyond all human  knowledge. The easy  part is this.
The process of being turned from a creature into a  son  would not have been
difficult  or  painful if  the  human  race  had  not turned  away  from God
centuries ago. They  were able to do this because He gave them free will: He
gave them free will because  a world of mere  automata could never  love and
therefore never know infinite happiness. The  difficult part  is  this.  All
Christians are  agreed  that there  is, in the full and original sense, only
one "Son  of God."  If we insist on asking "But could there have been many?"
we find ourselves in very deep  water. Have the  words "Could have been" any
sense at  all when  applied to  God? You can say that one  particular finite
thing "could have been" different from  what it  is,  because it  would have
been different if something else had been  different, and the something else
would have been different if some third thing had been different, and so on.
(The letters on this page would have  been red  if the printer  had used red
ink, and  he would have used red ink  if he had been instructed  to, and  so
on.) But  when you  are  talking  about  God-i.e.  about  the  rock  bottom,
irreducible Fact on  which all other facts depend- it is nonsensical  to ask
if  It  could  have been otherwise. It is what It is, and there is an end of
the matter. But quite apart  from  this, I find a  difficulty about the very
idea of  the  Father begetting  many sons from all eternity.  In order to be
many they would have  to be somehow different  from one another. Two pennies
have  the  same shape. How are  they two? By  occupying different places and
containing different atoms.  In other words, to think of them  as different,
we have had  to  bring in space and matter; in fact we have  had to bring in
"Nature"  or the  created universe. I can understand the distinction between
the Father and the Son without bringing in space or matter, because the  one
begets  and the other is begotten.  The  Father's relation to the Son is not
the same as the Son's relation to the Father. But if there were several sons
they would all be related to one another and to the Father in  the same way.
How would they differ from one another? One  does  not notice the difficulty
at first, of course. One thinks one can form the idea of several "sons." But
when  I think closely, I find that the  idea seemed possible only because  I
was vaguely imagining  them as human forms standing  about together  in some
kind of space.  In  other words, though I  pretended  to  be  thinking about
something that exists  before any universe was made,  I was really smuggling
in the picture of a universe  and putting  that something inside  it. When I
stop doing that and still  try to think of  the Father begetting  many  sons
"before all worlds" I find  I am not really  thinking of anything. The  idea
fades away into mere words. (Was Nature-space  and  time and  matter-created
precisely in order to make manyness possible? Is there perhaps no  other way
of  getting many  eternal  spirits  except  by  first  making  many  natural
creatures, in a universe,  and then spiritualising them?  But  of course all
this is guesswork.)
     (2) The idea that  the whole human race is,  in a sense, one thing -one
huge organism,  like  a  tree-must  not  be  confused  with  the  idea  that
individual differences do not matter or that real people,  Tom and Nobby and
Kate, are somehow less important than collective things like classes, races,
and so forth. Indeed the two ideas are opposites. Things  which are parts of
a single organism  may be very different  from one another: things which are
not, may be very alike. Six pennies are  quite  separate and very alike:  my
nose and my lungs  are very different but they are only alive at all because
they are parts of my  body and share its common life. Christianity thinks of
human individuals not as mere members of a group  or items in a list, but as
organs  in  a body-different from one  another and each contributing what no
other  could.  When  you  find  yourself wanting to  turn your children,  or
pupils, or even your neighbours, into people exactly like yourself, remember
that God probably  never meant them to be that.  You  and they are different
organs, intended  to do different things.  On the  other hand, when  you are
tempted not  to bother about someone else's  troubles because  they are  "no
business of yours," remember that though he is different from you he is part
of the same  organism  as you.  If you forget that he  belongs  to  the same
organism as yourself you will become an Individualist. If you forget that he
is a different organ from you, if you want to  suppress differences and make
people all alike, you will  become a Totalitarian. But a Christian must  not
be either a Totalitarian or an Individualist.
     I feel  a  strong desire to  tell you-and I  expect  you  feel a strong
desire to tell me-which of these two  errors is the worse. That is the devil
getting at  us.  He always  sends  errors into  the  world in pairs-pairs of
opposites. And he always encourages us to spend a lot of time thinking which
is the worse. You see why, of course? He relies on your extra dislike of the
one  error to draw you gradually into the opposite one. But do not let us be
fooled. We have to keep our eyes on the goal and go straight through between
both errors. We have no other concern than that with either of them.
7. Let's Pretend
     May I once again start  by putting two pictures, or two stories rather,
into your minds? One is  the story you  have all read called Beauty and  the
Beast. The girl, you remember,  had to marry a  monster for some reason. And
she did. She kissed it as if it were a man. And then, much to her relief, it
really turned into a man and all went well. The other story is about someone
who had to wear a mask; a mask which made him look much nicer than he really
was. He had to wear it for  year.  And  when he took it off he found his own
face had grown to fit it. He was  now really  beautiful.  What had begun  as
disguise had become a reality. I think both these stories may (in a fanciful
way,  of course)  help to illustrate what I have to say in this chapter.  Up
till  now, I have been trying to describe  facts-what God is and what He has
done. Now I want  to talk about practice-what do we do next? What difference
does  all this  theology make? It can start  making a difference tonight. If
you are interested enough to have read thus  far you are probably interested
enough to  make a  shot at saying your prayers: and, whatever  else you say,
you will probably say the Lord's Prayer.
     Its  very  first words are Our Father. Do you now  see what those words
mean? They mean quite frankly, that you are putting yourself in the place of
a son of God. To put it bluntly, you are dressing up as Christ. If you like,
you  are  pretending.  Because, of  course, the  moment you realise what the
words mean, you  realise  that you  are not a son of God.  You are not being
like The Son of God, whose will and interests are at  one with those  of the
Father: you  are a bundle of self-centred fears,  hopes, greeds, jealousies,
and self-conceit,  all doomed to death.  So that, in a way, this dressing up
as Christ is a piece of outrageous cheek.  But  the odd thing is that He has
ordered us to do it.
     Why? What is the good of pretending  to be what you are not? Well, even
on the human  level, you know, there are two kinds of pretending. There is a
bad kind, where the pretence is  there instead of  the real thing; as when a
man pretends he is  going  to help  you instead of  really  helping you. But
there  is also a good  kind,  where the pretence leads up to the real thing.
When you are not feeling particularly friendly but know you ought to be, the
best thing you can do, very often, is to put on a friendly manner and behave
as if you  were a nicer person than you  actually are. And in a few minutes,
as we have all noticed, you will be really feeling friendlier than you were.
Very often the only way to get a quality in  reality is to start behaving as
if you had it  already.  That is why children's games are so important. They
are  always  pretending to be grown-ups-playing soldiers,  playing shop. But
all the time, they are hardening their muscles and sharpening their wits, so
that the pretence of being grown-up helps them to grow up in earnest.
     Now, the moment  you realise "Here I am, dressing up as Christ," it  is
extremely  likely that you will  see at once some way in which  at that very
moment the pretence could be made less of a pretence  and more of a reality.
You will find several  things going on in your mind which would not be going
on there  if  you were really a son  of  God.  Well,  stop  them. Or you may
realise  that, instead  of saying your  prayers, you ought to be  downstairs
writing a letter, or helping your wife to wash-up. Well, go and do it.
     You  see what  is happening. The Christ Himself, the Son of God who  is
man  (just like you) and God (just like His Father) is actually at your side
and  is  already  at that  moment  beginning to turn  your  pretence into  a
reality. This  is not  merely a fancy  way of saying that your conscience is
telling you  what  to do. If  you simply ask your  conscience, you  get  one
result:  if you  remember that you are  dressing  up as  Christ,  you get  a
different one. There are lots of things which your conscience might not call
definitely wrong (specially things in  your mind)  but which you will see at
once you cannot go on doing if you are seriously trying to  be like  Christ.
For you are no longer thinking  simply about right and wrong; you are trying
to  catch  the  good  infection  from  a Person. It is more like  painting a
portrait than like  obeying  a set of rules. And the odd thing is that while
in one way it  is much harder than keeping  rules,  in another way it is far
easier.
     The real Son of  God is at your side.  He is beginning to turn you into
the same kind of thing as Himself. He is beginning, so to speak, to "inject"
His kind of life  and thought, His Zoe, into you; beginning  to turn the tin
soldier into a live man. The part of  you that does not like it  is the part
that is still tin.
     Some of you may feel that this is very unlike your  own experience. You
may say "I've  never had  the sense  of being helped by an invisible Christ,
but I often have been helped by other human beings." That is rather like the
woman in the first war who said that if there were a bread shortage it would
not bother  her  house because they always ate toast. If there is  no  bread
there will be no toast. If there were no help from Christ, there would be no
help from other human beings. He works on us in all sorts of  ways: not only
through what we think our "religious life." He works through Nature, through
our  own bodies, through books, sometimes through experiences which seem (at
the time) anti-Christian. When a young man who has been going to church in a
routine way honestly realises that he does not  believe in  Christianity and
stops going-provided he does it for honesty's sake and not just to annoy his
parents-the spirit of Christ is probably nearer to him then than it ever was
before. But above all, He works on us through each other.
     Men  are mirrors,  or "carriers"  of Christ  to  other  men.  Sometimes
unconscious carriers. This "good infection" can be carried by those who have
not got it themselves. People  who were not Christians themselves  helped me
to  Christianity.  But usually it is those  who know Him  that bring  Him to
others. That is why the Church, the whole body of Christians showing  Him to
one another, is so important.  You might  say  that when  two Christians are
following Christ together there is not  twice as  much Christianity as  when
they are apart, but sixteen times as much.
     But do  not forget this. At first it is  natural for a baby to take its
mother's  milk without knowing  its mother. It  is equally natural for us to
see the man who helps us without seeing  Christ behind him. But we  must not
remain babies. We must go on to recognise the  real Giver. It is madness not
to. Because, if we  do not, we shall be relying on human beings. And that is
going to let us down. The best of them will  make mistakes; all of them will
die. We must  be thankful  to all the  people  who  have helped  us, we must
honour  them  and love them. But never, never  pin your whole  faith on  any
human being: not if he  is the best and wisest in the whole world. There are
lots of nice things you can do with sand; but do not try building a house on
it.
     And now we begin to see  what  it is that  the New Testament is  always
talking about. It talks about Christians  "being born again"; it talks about
them "putting on  Christ";  about Christ "being  formed  in us";  about  our
coming to "have the mind of Christ."
     Put  right out  of your head the idea that these are only fancy ways of
saying  that Christians  are to read what Christ said and  try to  carry  it
out-as a man may read what Plato or Marx said and try  to carry it out. They
mean something much  more than  that. They mean  that a real Person, Christ,
here and now, in that  very room where you are saying your prayers, is doing
things to  you.  It is not a  question of a good man who died  two  thousand
years ago. It is a living Man, still as much a man as you, and still as much
God as He was when He created the world, really  coming and interfering with
your very self; killing the old natural  self  in you and  replacing it with
the  kind  of  self  He has. At first,  only for moments.  Then  for  longer
periods. Finally, if all goes well, turning you permanently into a different
sort  of  thing; into  a new little Christ, a being  which, in its own small
way,  has the  same  kind of  life as God; which  shares in His power,  joy,
knowledge and eternity. And soon we make two other discoveries.
     (1)  We  begin  to notice,  besides  our  particular  sinful acts,  our
sinfulness; begin to be alarmed not only about what we do, but about what we
are. This may sound rather difficult, so I will try to make it clear from my
own case. When I come to my evening prayers and try to reckon up the sins of
the day, nine  times out of ten the  most  obvious  one is  some sin against
charity; I have sulked  or snapped or sneered or snubbed or stormed. And the
excuse  that immediately  springs to my mind is that the provocation was  so
sudden and unexpected: I was caught off my guard, I had  not time to collect
myself.  Now  that may  be  an extenuating  circumstance  as  regards  those
particular  acts: they would obviously be worse if they had  been deliberate
and premeditated. On the other hand, surely what a man does when he is taken
off his guard is the best evidence for what sort of a man he is? Surely what
pops out before the man has time to put on a disguise is the truth? If there
are rats  in  a cellar you  are most  likely  to see them if you go  in very
suddenly. But the suddenness does not create the rats: it only prevents them
from hiding. In the same way the suddenness of the provocation does not make
me an ill-tempered man: it only shows me what an ill-tempered man I  am. The
rats are  always there  in the cellar, but if you go in shouting and noisily
they will have taken  cover before you switch  on  the light. Apparently the
rats of resentment and vindictiveness are always  there in  the cellar of my
soul. Now that cellar is out of reach of  my conscious will.  I can  to some
extent control my acts: I have no direct control over my temperament. And if
(as I said before) what we are matters even more than what we do-if, indeed,
what we do matters chiefly as evidence of what  we are-then it  follows that
the change which I most  need to undergo  is a  change  that my  own direct,
voluntary  efforts cannot bring  about  And this applies to  my good actions
too. How many of  them were done for the right  motive? How many for fear of
public opinion,  or a desire to show off? How  many from a sort of obstinacy
or sense of superiority which, in different circumstances, might equally had
led to some very bad act? But I cannot, by direct moral effort,  give myself
new motives. After the first few steps in the Christian life we realise that
everything which really needs  to  be done in our  souls can be done only by
God. And that brings  us to  something which has been  very misleading in my
language up to now.
     (2)  I  have been talking  as  if it  were  we  who  did everything. In
reality, of course, it is God who does everything. We, at most, allow  it to
be done to us.  In a  sense  you  might  even say it  is God  who  does  the
pretending. The Three-Personal God,  so to speak, sees before Him in  fact a
self-centred, greedy, grumbling, rebellious human animal.  But  He says "Let
us pretend that this is not  a mere creature, but our Son. It is like Christ
in so far as it is  a Man, for He became Man. Let us pretend that it is also
like Him in  Spirit. Let us treat it as if it  were what  in fact it is not.
Let us pretend in order to make the pretence  into a reality."  God looks at
you  as  if  you were a  little Christ: Christ stands beside you to turn you
into one. I daresay this idea of a divine make-believe sounds rather strange
at  first. But,  is it so strange  really? Is not that how  the higher thing
always raises the lower? A mother teaches her baby to  talk by talking to it
as if it understood long before it really does. We treat our dogs as if they
were "almost  human":  that is why they really become "almost  human" in the
end.
8. Is Christianity Hard Or Easy?
     In the last chapter we were considering  the Christian idea of "putting
on Christ,"  or  first "dressing up" as a son of God in order  that you  may
finally become a real son. What I want to make clear is that this is not one
among many jobs  a Christian has  to  do; and it is not  a  sort  of special
exercise for  the top class.  It is  the whole of Christianity. Christianity
offers  nothing else at all. And I should  like  to point out how it differs
from ordinary ideas of "morality" and "being good."
     The ordinary idea which we  all  have before  we become  Christians  is
this. We  take as starting point  our ordinary self with its various desires
and interests. We then admit  that  something  else  call it  "morality"  or
"decent behaviour," or "the good of society" has claims on this self: claims
which interfere with its own desires. What we mean by "being good" is giving
in to those claims. Some  of the things the ordinary self wanted to do  turn
out to be what we  call "wrong": well, we  must give  them up. Other things,
which  the self did  not want to do, turn  out to be  what we call  "right":
well, we shall have to do them. But we are hoping all the time that when all
the  demands  have  been  met, the  poor natural  self  will still have some
chance, and some time, to get on with its own life and do what it  likes. In
fact,  we  are  very like an honest man  paying  his taxes. He pays them all
right, but he does  hope that there will be enough left over for him to live
on. Because we are still taking our natural self as the starting point.
     As long as  we are thinking  that  way, one or other of two  results is
likely  to follow. Either we give up trying  to be  good, or  else we become
very unhappy indeed. For, make no mistake: if you are really going to try to
meet all the demands made  on the natural self, it will not have enough left
over to live on. The more you obey your conscience, the more your conscience
will  demand of you. And your natural  self, which is thus being starved and
hampered and worried at every turn, will  get  angrier  and angrier. In  the
end, you will either give up trying to be  good, or else become one of those
people who, as they  say, "live  for  others" but always  in a discontented,
grumbling  way-always wondering why  the  others  do not notice it more  and
always making a martyr of yourself.  And once you have become that  you will
be a far greater pest to anyone who has to live with you than you would have
been if you had remained frankly selfish.
     The Christian way  is different: harder, and easier. Christ says  "Give
me All. I don't want so much of your time and so  much of  your money and so
much of your work: I want You. I have not come to torment your natural self,
but to kill  it. No half-measures are any good. I  don't want  to cut off  a
branch  here and a branch there, I want to have the whole tree down. I don't
want to drill the tooth, or  crown it, or  stop it, but to have it out. Hand
over  the whole natural self,  all the desires  which  you think innocent as
well  as  the ones  you think wicked-the whole outfit. I will give you a new
self  instead.  In fact, I  will give you Myself: my own  will  shall become
yours."
     Both harder  and easier than what  we  are all trying  to  do. You have
noticed, I expect, that Christ Himself sometimes describes the Christian way
as very hard, sometimes as very easy. He says, "Take up your Cross"-in other
words,  it is like going to be beaten to death in a concentration camp. Next
minute  he says, "My yoke  is easy  and my burden light." He means both. And
one can just see why both are true.
     Teachers will tell you that the laziest boy in the class is the one who
works hardest  in the end. They mean this.  If you  give two  boys,  say,  a
proposition in geometry to do, the  one who is prepared to take trouble will
try to understand  it. The lazy boy will  try to learn it by heart  because,
for the moment, that needs less effort. But six months  later, when they are
preparing for an exam., that lazy boy is doing  hours and hours of miserable
drudgery over things the other boy understands, and positively enjoys,  in a
few minutes. Laziness  means  more work in the long run. Or look  at it this
way. In a battle, or in mountain climbing, there is often one thing which it
takes  a lot  of  pluck to do;  but it is also, in  the long run, the safest
thing to do. If you  funk  it, you will  find yourself, hours  later, in far
worse danger. The cowardly thing is also the most dangerous thing.
     It  is like that here. The terrible thing, the almost impossible thing,
is to hand over your whole self-all  your wishes and  precautions-to Christ.
But it is far  easier than what we are all trying to do instead. For what we
are  trying to  do is to remain what  we call "ourselves," to  keep personal
happiness as  our  great aim in life, and yet at the same time be "good." We
are all trying to let  our mind and heart go their  own way-centred on money
or pleasure or ambition-and hoping, in spite of this, to behave honestly and
chastely and humbly. And that is exactly what Christ warned us you could not
do. As He said, a thistle cannot produce figs. If I am a field that contains
nothing  but grass-seed, I cannot produce wheat. Cutting the grass may  keep
it short: but I shall still produce grass and no wheat. If I want to produce
wheat, the change must go deeper than the surface. I must be ploughed up and
re-sown.
     That  is why the real  problem of the Christian life comes where people
do not usually  look  for it. It  comes  the  very moment  you wake  up each
morning.  All  your  wishes  and  hopes  for the day  rush at  you like wild
animals. And the first  job each morning consists simply in shoving them all
back;  in listening  to that other voice, taking that  other point  of view,
letting that other larger, stronger,  quieter life come flowing  in.  And so
on, all day. Standing back from all  your natural  fussings  and  frettings;
coming in out of the wind.
     We can only do it  for moments at first. But from those moments the new
sort  of  life  will be  spreading through  our system: because now  we  are
letting  Him work at  the right part  of  us.  It is  the difference between
paint, which is merely  laid on the surface,  and a dye or stain which soaks
right through. He  never talked vague,  idealistic  gas. When he  said,  "Be
perfect," He meant it. He meant that  we must go  in for the full treatment.
It is  hard; but  the  sort  of compromise we  are all  hankering  after  is
harder-in fact,  it is impossible. It may be hard  for an egg to turn into a
bird: it would  be a  jolly  sight  harder  for  it to  learn  to fly  while
remaining an  egg.  We are  like eggs  at  present. And  you  cannot  go  on
indefinitely being just  an ordinary, decent egg. We must be hatched  or  go
bad.
     May  I  come  back  to  what  I  said  before?  This  is the  whole  of
Christianity. There  is  nothing else.  It  is so easy  to get muddled about
that.  It  is  easy  to  think  that  the  Church  has  a  lot of  different
objects-education, building, missions,  holding services. Just as it is easy
to  think  the  State  has a lot of different  objects-military,  political,
economic, and what  not. But in a way things are much simpler than that. The
State exists  simply to promote  and to  protect  the ordinary happiness  of
human beings in this life. A husband and wife chatting over a fire, a couple
of  friends having a game of darts in a pub, a man reading a book in his own
room or digging in his own garden-that is  what the State  is there for. And
unless they are  helping to increase  and prolong and protect  such moments,
all  the  laws,  parliaments, armies, courts,  police, economics, etc.,  are
simply a waste of  time. In the same way the Church exists for  nothing else
but to draw men  into Christ, to make them little  Christs.  If they are not
doing that,  all  the cathedrals, clergy,  missions, sermons, even the Bible
itself, are simply a waste of time. God became Man for no other purpose.  It
is  even doubtful, you know, whether  the whole universe was created for any
other purpose. It says in the Bible  that  the whole  universe  was made for
Christ  and that  everything  is to be  gathered together in Him.  I do  not
suppose any  of us can  understand how this will happen as regards the whole
universe.  We do not know  what (if anything) lives in the parts of it  that
are millions of miles away from this Earth. Even on  this Earth  we  do  not
know how it  applies to things other than men. After all, that  is  what you
would expect. We  have been shown the plan  only  in so far as  it  concerns
ourselves.
     I  sometimes like to imagine that  I can just see how it might apply to
other things. I  think I can see how the higher animals are in a sense drawn
into  Man  when he loves them and makes them (as he  does)  much more nearly
human than they would otherwise be. I can even see a sense in which the dead
things  and  plants are  drawn  into  Man  as he studies them and  uses  and
appreciates  them. And if there  were  intelligent creatures in other worlds
they might do the  same with their worlds. It might be that when intelligent
creatures entered into  Christ they would, in that way, bring all the  other
things in along with them. But I do not know: it is only a guess.
     What we  have  been told is how we men can be  drawn  into Christ  -can
become part of that wonderful present which the young Prince of the universe
wants to offer to  His Father-that present which is Himself and therefore us
in  Him.  It is  the  only thing  we were made for. And  there  are strange,
exciting  hints in the Bible that when we are  drawn in, a great many  other
things in  Nature will begin to  come right. The bad dream will be over:  it
will be morning.
9. Counting The Cost
     I find a good many people have been bothered by what I said in the last
chapter about Our Lord's words, "Be  ye  perfect." Some people seem to think
this means "Unless you are perfect, I will not help you";  and as  we cannot
be perfect, then, if He meant  that, our position is hopeless. But  I do not
think He did mean that. I think He  meant "The only help I will give is help
to become  perfect. You may want something less: but I will give you nothing
less."
     Let me explain. When I was a child I  often  had  toothache, and I knew
that if I went to my mother she  would give me  something which would deaden
the pain  for that night and let  me get to sleep.  But I did not  go to  my
mother-at least, not till the pain became very bad. And the reason I did not
go was this. I did not doubt she would give me the  aspirin; but  I knew she
would also  do something else. I  knew she would take me to the dentist next
morning. I could not get  what I wanted out of her without getting something
more, which I did not want. I wanted immediate relief from pain: but I could
not get it without having  my teeth set permanently right. And I  knew those
dentists; I knew they started  fiddling about with all  sorts of other teeth
which had not yet  begun to ache. They would not let sleeping  dogs  lie; if
you gave them an inch they took an ell.
     Now,  if  I may put it  that way, Our Lord is like the dentists. If you
give Him  an inch, He  will take an  ell. Dozens  of people go to Him to  be
cured  of  some  one  particular  sin  which   they  are  ashamed  of  (like
masturbation or  physical  cowardice) or  which is obviously  spoiling daily
life  (like bad temper or drunkenness). Well, He will cure it all right: but
He will not stop there. That may be  all you asked; but if once you call Him
in, He will give you the full treatment.
     That  is  why He warned people  to  "count  the  cost"  before becoming
Christians. "Make no  mistake,"  He says, "if  you let  me, I will make  you
perfect. The moment  you put yourself in My hands, that is  what you are  in
for. Nothing less,  or other,  than that. You have  free  will,  and  if you
choose, you can push Me away. But if  you  do  not  push Me away, understand
that I am going to see this job through. Whatever suffering it may cost  you
in  your earthly life, whatever  inconceivable purification it  may cost you
after death, whatever  it costs Me, I  will never  rest, nor  let you  rest,
until you are literally perfect-until my Father can  say without reservation
that He is well pleased with you, as He said  He  was  well pleased with me.
This I can do and will do. But I will not do anything less."
     And yet-this is the other and equally important side of it- this Helper
who  will,  in the long run,  be satisfied with nothing  less than  absolute
perfection, will also be delighted with the  first feeble,  stumbling effort
you make  tomorrow  to do  the simplest  duty. As  a great  Christian writer
(George MacDonald) pointed out, every father is  pleased at the baby's first
attempt to walk: no  father  would  be  satisfied with  anything less than a
firm, free, manly walk in a grown-up son. In the same way, he said,  "God is
easy to please, but hard to satisfy."
     The  practical  upshot  is  this.  On the  one hand,  God's demand  for
perfection need not  discourage you in the least in your present attempts to
be  good, or even in your present failures. Each time  you fall He will pick
you up  again. And He knows perfectly well that your own  efforts  are never
going  to bring you  anywhere near perfection. On  the other hand,  you must
realise from the outset that the goal towards which He is beginning to guide
you is absolute  perfection; and no  power in the whole universe, except you
yourself, can prevent Him from taking you to that goal. That is what you are
in for.  And it is very important to realise that. If we do not, then we are
very likely to start pulling back and resisting Him after a certain point. I
think that  many of us, when Christ has enabled  us  to overcome one or  two
sins that  were an obvious  nuisance, are inclined to feel (though we do not
out it into words) that we  are now good  enough. He  has done all we wanted
Him  to do, and we should be obliged if He would  now leave us  alone. As we
say "I never expected  to be a saint, I only wanted to  be a decent ordinary
chap." And we imagine when we say this that we are being humble.
     But this is the fatal mistake. Of  course  we never  wanted, and  never
asked, to be made into the sort of  creatures  He is going to make us  into.
But the  question  is  not what  we  intended  ourselves to be,  but what He
intended us to  be  when  He  made us.  He is the inventor,  we are only the
machine. He is the painter, we are only the picture. How should we know what
He  means us  to  be like? You see,  He has already  made us  something very
different from what  we  were.  Long ago, before we were born, when  we were
inside our mothers'  bodies, we passed through various stages. We  were once
rather like vegetables, and once rather like  fish; it  was only at  a later
stage  that  we  became like  human babies.  And if we had been conscious at
those earlier stages, I  daresay we should have been quite contented to stay
as vegetables or fish-should not have wanted to be made into babies. But all
the  time  He knew His  plan  for us and  was determined  to  carry  it out.
Something the same is now happening at a higher level. We may be content  to
remain  what we call "ordinary people": but He is determined to  carry out a
quite different  plan.  To shrink back from that plan is not humility; it is
laziness and cowardice. To submit to it is not conceit or megalomania; it is
obedience.
     Here is another  way of putting the two  sides of the truth. On the one
hand we must never imagine that our own unaided  efforts can be relied on to
carry us even through the next  twenty-four hours as "decent" people. If  He
does not support us, not one of us is safe from some gross sin. On the other
hand, no possible degree of holiness or heroism which has ever been recorded
of the greatest saints  is beyond what He  is determined to produce in every
one of  us in  the end. The job will not  be completed in  this life: but He
means to get us as far as possible before death.
     That is why we must  not  be surprised if we are in  for a rough  time.
When a man turns to Christ and seems to be  getting  on pretty well  (in the
sense that some of his bad habits are now corrected), he often feels that it
would  now be natural if  things went  fairly  smoothly. When  troubles come
along-illnesses, money troubles, new kinds of temptation-he is disappointed.
These things, he feels, might have been  necessary to rouse him and make him
repent in his  bad old days; but why  now? Because God is forcing him on, or
up, to a higher  level: putting him into situations where he will have to be
very much braver, or more  patient, or  more loving, than he ever dreamed of
being before.  It seems  to us all unnecessary: but that is because we  have
not yet had the slightest notion of the tremendous thing He means to make of
us.
     I find I must borrow yet another parable from George MacDonald. Imagine
yourself as a  living house. God comes in to rebuild  that house. At  first,
perhaps, you can understand what He is doing. He is getting the drains right
and  stopping the leaks  in  the roof and  so on: you knew  that those  jobs
needed doing and so you  are not surprised. But presently he starts knocking
the  house about  in a way that hurts  abominably and  does not seem to make
sense.  What on earth is He up  to? The  explanation is  that He is building
quite a different house from the one you thought of- throwing out a new wing
here, putting on an extra floor there, running up towers, making courtyards.
You thought you were going to be made  into a decent little  cottage: but He
is building a palace. He intends to come and live in it Himself.
     The command Be ye perfect is not idealistic gas. Nor is it a command to
do the impossible.  He is going to make us into creatures that can obey that
command. He said (in the Bible) that we were  "gods" and He is going to make
good His words. If  we let Him-for we can prevent Him, if we  choose-He will
make the feeblest and  filthiest of  us  into a god or  goddess, a dazzling,
radiant, immortal creature, pulsating all through  with  such energy and joy
and wisdom  and love as we cannot now  imagine,  a bright  stainless  mirror
which reflects back to God perfectly (though, of course, on a smaller scale)
His own boundless power and delight  and goodness.  The process will be long
and in parts very painful; but that is what we  are in for. Nothing less. He
meant what He said.
10. Nice People Or New Men
     He  meant what He  said. Those  who put  themselves  in His  hands will
become perfect, as He  is perfect-perfect in  love, wisdom, joy, beauty, and
immortality. The change will not be completed in this life, for death is  an
important  part of the  treatment. How far the change will  have gone before
death in any particular Christian is uncertain.
     I think this is the right moment to consider  a question which is often
asked: If Christianity is true why are  not  all Christians  obviously nicer
than all  non-Christians? What lies behind that question is partly something
very reasonable  and partly something  that is  not reasonable at  all.  The
reasonable part is this. If conversion to  Christianity makes no improvement
in a  man's outward actions -if he continues  to  be  just  as  snobbish  or
spiteful  or envious  or ambitious as he was  before-then  I  think we  must
suspect  that his  "conversion"  was  largely  imaginary;  and  after  one's
original conversion, every  time one thinks one has made an advance, that is
the  test  to  apply.  Fine  feelings,  new  insights, greater  interest  in
"religion"  mean nothing unless they  make our actual behaviour better; just
as in an illness "feeling better" is not much good if the thermometer  shows
that your temperature  is  still going up. In  that sense the outer world is
quite right to judge Christianity by its results. Christ told us to judge by
results.  A  tree is known by its fruit;  or,  as we say,  the proof  of the
pudding is in the eating. When we Christians behave badly, or fail to behave
well, we are  making Christianity  unbelievable to  the outside  world.  The
wartime  posters told us that Careless Talk costs  Lives. It is equally true
that  Careless Lives  cost Talk.  Our  careless lives  set the  outer  world
talking; and we give them grounds for  talking in a way that throws doubt on
the truth of Christianity itself.
     But there is another way of demanding results in which the outer  world
may  be quite  illogical.  They may demand not merely that  each  man's life
should improve if he becomes a Christian:  they may also demand  before they
believe in Christianity that they should see the  whole world neatly divided
into two camps -Christian  and  non-Christian-and that all the people in the
first camp at any given moment should be obviously nicer than all the people
in the second. This is unreasonable on several grounds.
     (1)  In the first place the situation in the actual world is  much more
complicated than that. The world does not consist of 100 per cent Christians
and 100 per cent non-Christians. There are people (a great many of them) who
are slowly  ceasing to be Christians but who  still call  themselves by that
name: some  of  them  are clergymen.  There are other people  who are slowly
becoming  Christians  though they  do not yet call themselves so. There  are
people who do not  accept the full Christian doctrine  about Christ but  who
are so strongly attracted by Him that they  are  His in a much deeper  sense
than they themselves understand. There are people in other religions who are
being led by God's secret influence to concentrate  on  those parts of their
religion which are in agreement with  Christianity, and who  thus  belong to
Christ without  knowing it. For example,  a Buddhist of good will may be led
to concentrate more and more  on  the Buddhist  teaching about  mercy and to
leave in the background (though he might still say he believed) the Buddhist
teaching  on  certain  other  points. Many of the  good  Pagans  long before
Christ's  birth may have been in this position. And always, of course, there
are  a  great many people who are just  confused in mind and have  a lot  of
inconsistent beliefs all  jumbled up together. Consequently, it  is not much
use trying to make  judgments  about  Christians and  non-Christians in  the
mass. It is some use comparing cats and dogs, or even men and women, in  the
mass, because there  one knows definitely which is  which. Also,  an  animal
does not turn (either slowly or suddenly) from a dog into a cat. But when we
are comparing Christians in  general with non-Christians in general, we  are
usually not  thinking about real people whom we know at all, but  only about
two vague ideas which we have got from novels and newspapers. If you want to
compare the bad Christian and  the good  Atheist,  you must  think about two
real specimens  whom  you  have actually met. Unless  we come down to  brass
tacks in that way, we shall only be wasting time.
     (2) Suppose  we have  come down to  brass tacks and are now talking not
about an imaginary Christian  and an imaginary  non-Christian, but about two
real  people  in our own neighbourhood. Even then we  must be careful to ask
the right question. If Christianity is true then it ought to follow (a) That
any Christian will be nicer than the  same person would be if he were not  a
Christian.  (b)  That any man who  becomes a Christian will be nicer than he
was before.  Just in the same  way,  if the  advertisements of White-smile's
toothpaste are true it ought to follow (a) That anyone who uses it will have
better teeth than the same person would have if  he did not use it. (b) That
if anyone begins to use it his teeth will improve. But to point  out that I,
who  use  Whitesmile's  (and  also  have inherited  bad  teeth from  both my
parents), have not got  as fine a set as some healthy young  Negro who never
used  toothpaste at  all, does not, by itself, prove that the advertisements
are  untrue.  Christian  Miss  Bates  may  have  an  unkinder  tongue   than
unbelieving  Dick  Firkin.  That,  by  itself,  does  not  tell  us  whether
Christianity works.  The question is what Miss Bates's tongue would  be like
if she were not a Christian and what Dick's  would be like if he became one.
Miss Bates  and  Dick, as a result  of natural  causes and early upbringing,
have  certain  temperaments: Christianity professes to put both temperaments
under new  management if they will allow it to  do so. What you have a right
to ask  is whether  that  management, if  allowed to take over, improves the
concern. Everyone knows that what is being  managed in Dick Firkin's case is
much "nicer" than  what is being managed in  Miss  Bates's. That is  not the
point. To  judge the management of a factory, you must consider not only the
output but the plant. Considering the plant at Factory A it  may be a wonder
that it turns out anything  at  all; considering the  first-class outfit  at
Factory  B its output, though high, may be a great deal lower than  it ought
to be.  No  doubt the  good manager  at  Factory  A is going to  put  in new
machinery as soon as he can, but that takes time. In the meantime low output
does not prove that he is a failure.
     (3) And now, let us go  a little deeper. The manager is going to put in
new machinery: before  Christ has  finished with Miss Bates, she is going to
be very "nice" indeed. But if we left it  at  that, it would sound as though
Christ's only aim was to pull Miss Bates  up to the same level on which Dick
had  been all  along. We have been talking,  in  fact, as  if Dick  were all
right; as if Christianity was something  nasty  people needed and  nice ones
could afford to do without;  and  as  if niceness was all that God demanded.
But this would  be a fatal  mistake.  The  truth is that in God's  eyes Dick
Firkin needs "saving" every bit as much as Miss Bates. In one  sense (I will
explain what sense in a moment) niceness hardly comes into the question.
     You cannot expect God to look at  Dick's  placid  temper  and  friendly
disposition  exactly as  we do. They  result  from  natural causes which God
Himself creates.  Being merely  temperamental,  they will  all disappear  if
Dick's digestion alters. The niceness,  in fact,  is God's gift to Dick, not
Dick's gift to God. In the same way, God has allowed natural causes, working
in a world spoiled by centuries of sin, to  produce in Miss Bates the narrow
mind and jangled nerves which account for most of her nastiness. He intends,
in His own  good time, to set that  part  of her right. But that is not, for
God, the critical part of the business. It presents  no difficulties.  It is
not what He is  anxious about.  What He is watching  and waiting and working
for is something that is not easy even for God, because, from the nature  of
the case, even  He  cannot produce it by a mere act  of power. He is waiting
and watching for it both  in Miss Bates and in  Dick Firkin. It is something
they can freely give  Him or freely refuse  to Him. Will they, or  will they
not, turn  to  Him and  thus  fulfil  the only purpose  for which  they were
created?  Their free will is  trembling  inside  them  like the needle  of a
compass. But  this is a needle  that  can choose. It can  point to its  true
North; but it need not. Will  the needle swing round,  and settle, and point
to God?
     He can help it to do  so. He cannot force it. He  cannot, so to  speak,
put out His own hand and pull it into the right position,  for then it would
not be  free  will  any more. Will it  point North?  That is the question on
which all hangs. Will Miss Bates and  Dick  offer their natures to God?  The
question  whether the  natures they offer  or withhold are, at  that moment,
nice or nasty ones, is of secondary importance. God  can see to that part of
the problem.
     Do not misunderstand me. Of course God  regards a nasty nature as a bad
and deplorable  thing. And, of course,  He regards a  nice nature as a  good
thing-good  like bread, or sunshine, or water. But these are the good things
which He  gives  and  we receive. He  created Dick's sound nerves  and  good
digestion,  and there  is  plenty  more where  they  came from. It costs God
nothing, so far as we know, to create nice things: but to convert rebellious
wills  cost Him crucifixion. And because  they  are  wills they can-in  nice
people just as much as  in nasty ones-refuse His request.  And then, because
that niceness in Dick was merely part of nature, it will all go to pieces in
the end. Nature herself will all pass away. Natural causes  come together in
Dick to make a pleasant psychological pattern, just as they come together in
a sunset to make a  pleasant  pattern of colours. Presently (for that is how
nature works) they will fall apart again and the pattern in both  cases will
disappear. Dick has had the chance to turn (or rather, to allow God to turn)
that momentary pattern into the beauty of an eternal spirit: and  he has not
taken it.
     There is a  paradox here.  As  long as Dick  does  not turn to  God, he
thinks his  niceness is his own,  and just as  long as he thinks that, it is
not his own. It is when Dick realises that his niceness is not his own but a
gift from  God,  and when he offers it back to God-  it is just then that it
begins  to be really  his own. For  now Dick is beginning to take a share in
his own creation. The only things we can keep  are the things we freely give
to God. What we try to keep for ourselves is just what we are sure to lose.
     We must,  therefore, not  be surprised if we  find among the Christians
some people who  are still nasty. There is even, when  you come to  think it
over,  a reason  why nasty people might  be expected to  turn to  Christ  in
greater numbers  than nice  ones. That was what  people  objected  to  about
Christ during His life on  earth:  He seemed to attract "such awful people."
That  is what people still  object to, and always will. Do you not  see why?
Christ said '"Blessed are the poor" and  "How hard  it  is  for  the rich to
enter  the Kingdom,"  and  no doubt He primarily meant the economically rich
and economically poor.  But do not His words  also apply to another  kind of
riches  and poverty? One of the dangers of having a lot of money is that you
may  be quite satisfied with the kinds of happiness money  can give  and  so
fail to realise your need  for  God.  If everything  seems to come simply by
signing  checks,  you  may  forget  that you  are at  every  moment  totally
dependent on God. Now quite plainly, natural gifts carry with them a similar
danger. If you have sound nerves  and intelligence and health and popularity
and a  good  upbringing,  you are likely to  be  quite  satisfied with  your
character as it is. "Why drag God into it?" you may ask. A certain level  of
good conduct comes  fairly easily to you. You  are not one of those wretched
creatures  who  are  always  being  tripped up  by  sex,  or dipsomania,  or
nervousness, or bad temper. Everyone says you are a  nice chap  and (between
ourselves) you  agree  with  them. You are quite  likely to believe dial all
this niceness is your own  doing: and you may easily not  feel the need  for
any  better kind of  goodness. Often people who have all these natural kinds
of  goodness  cannot  be brought to recognise  their need for Christ  at all
until,  one  day,  the   natural  goodness   lets  them   down   and   their
self-satisfaction is shattered. In other words, it is hard for those who are
"rich" in this sense to enter the Kingdom.
     It  is  very different  for  the nasty people-the  little, low,  timid,
warped,  thin-blooded, lonely people, or the passionate, sensual, unbalanced
people. If they make any attempt at  goodness at all, they learn, in  double
quick time,  that they  need  help. It is  Christ or nothing for them. It is
taking  up the cross and following-or else despair. They are the lost sheep;
He  came specially to  find  them. They  are (in one  very real and terrible
sense) the "poor": He blessed diem. They are  the "awful set" he goes  about
with-and of course the Pharisees say still, as they said from the first, "If
there were anything in Christianity those people would not be Christians."
     There is either a warning or an encouragement here for every one of us.
If  you  are  a nice person-if virtue  comes easily to you  beware! Much  is
expected from those to  whom  much is  given. If  you  mistake for your  own
merits what are really God's gifts to you  through  nature,  and if you  are
contented with simply being nice, you are still a rebel: and all those gifts
will  only  make your fall more terrible, your corruption  more complicated,
your bad  example more  disastrous.  The Devil  was  an archangel once;  his
natural  gifts  were  as  far  above  yours as  yours are  above  those of a
chimpanzee.
     But if you are a poor  creature-poisoned  by  a wretched upbringing  in
some house full of vulgar jealousies  and senseless quarrels-saddled,  by no
choice of your own, with some loathsome sexual perversion-nagged day  in and
day  out  by  an  inferiority  complex  that  makes you  snap  at  your best
friends-do not despair. He knows  all about it. You are one of the poor whom
He blessed. He knows what a wretched machine you are trying  to drive.  Keep
on.  Do what you can. One  day (perhaps in another  world,  but  perhaps far
sooner than that) he will fling it on the scrap-heap and give you a new one.
And then you  may astonish  us all-not least yourself: for you  have learned
your driving in a hard school. (Some of the last will be  first and some  of
the first will be last.)
     "Niceness"-wholesome, integrated personality-is an excellent  thing. We
must try by every medical, educational, economic, and political means in our
power, to  produce a world where as many people as  possible grow up "nice";
just  as we must try to produce a world where all have plenty to eat. But we
must not suppose that even if we succeeded in making everyone nice we should
have  saved  their souls.  A  world  of  nice people,  content in  their own
niceness,  looking no  further,  turned  away  from God,  would be  just  as
desperately in need of salvation as a miserable world-and might even be more
difficult to save.
     For  mere  improvement  is  not redemption,  though  redemption  always
improves  people even here and  now and will, in  the end, improve them to a
degree  we cannot  yet imagine.  God became man to turn creatures into sons:
not simply to  produce better  men of the old kind but to produce a new kind
of man. It is not like teaching a  horse to jump better and  better but like
turning a  horse  into a winged  creature.  Of  course, once it has  got its
wings, it will soar over fences which could never have been  jumped and thus
beat the natural horse at its own game. But there may be a period, while the
wings are just  beginning  to grow, when it cannot do so:  and at that stage
the  lumps on  the shoulders-no one could tell by  looking at them that they
are going to be wings-may even give it an awkward appearance.
     But perhaps we have  already spent too long  on  this question. If what
you want  is  an  argument  against  Christianity (and I  well remember  how
eagerly I looked for such arguments when I began  to be afraid it was  true)
you can easily  find some stupid  and unsatisfactory Christian  and say, "So
there's your boasted  new  man! Give  me the old kind." But if once you have
begun  to see that Christianity  is on other grounds probable, you will know
in your heart that this is only evading the issue. What can you  ever really
know  of  other  people's souls-of  their  temptations, their opportunities,
their  struggles? One soul in the whole creation  you do know: and it is the
only one  whose fate is placed in your hands. If there is a God, you are, in
a sense, alone with Him. You cannot put Him off with speculations about your
next door neighbours  or memories of what  you have read in books. What will
all that chatter and hearsay count (will you  even  be able to remember it?)
when the anaesthetic  fog which we call "nature" or  "the real world"  fades
away and  the Presence  in which  you  have  always  stood becomes palpable,
immediate, and unavoidable?
11. The New Men
     In the last chapter I compared Christ's  work of making New Men to  the
process of turning a horse  into  a  winged creature.  I  used that  extreme
example in order to emphasise the point that it is not mere improvement  but
Transformation. The  nearest parallel to it in the  world of nature is to be
found in the  remarkable transformations  we can make in insects by applying
certain  rays to  them. Some  people think this is how Evolution worked. The
alterations in creatures on  which it all depends may  have been produced by
rays  coming  from outer  space. (Of course  once the alterations are there,
what  they  call "Natural Selection" gets to work on them: i.e.,  the useful
alterations survive and the other ones get weeded out.)
     Perhaps a modern man can understand the Christian idea best if he takes
it in connection with Evolution. Everyone now knows about Evolution (though,
of course, some educated people  disbelieve it): everyone has been told that
man has evolved from lower types  of life. Consequently, people often wonder
"What is  the  next  step? When is the  thing  beyond man going  to appear?"
Imaginative  writers try sometimes to  picture this next step-the "Superman"
as they call him; but they usually only succeed in picturing someone a  good
deal  nastier  than  man as we know him and then try to make up for that  by
sticking  on  extra  legs  or arms. But supposing  the next  step was  to be
something even  more different from the earlier steps than they ever dreamed
of? And is it not very likely it would be? Thousands of centuries  ago huge,
very heavily armoured  creatures were  evolved. If anyone  had  at that time
been watching  the course of Evolution  he would probably have expected that
it was going to go on to  heavier and heavier armour. But he would have been
wrong. The future had a card up  its sleeve which nothing at that time would
have  led him  to  expect.  It was  going to  spring  on him  little, naked,
unarmoured animals which  had better brains: and with those brains they were
going  to master the whole planet. They were not  merely going  to have more
power than the prehistoric monsters,  they were going to have  a new kind of
power. The next step was not only going to be different, but different  with
a new kind of difference. The stream of  Evolution was  not going to flow on
in the direction in which he saw it flowing: it  was in fact going to take a
sharp bend.
     Now it seems to  me that most of the  popular  guesses at the Next Step
are making just the  same sort  of mistake. People see (or at any rate  they
think they  see)  men developing greater  brains and getting greater mastery
over nature. And because they think the stream is flowing in that direction,
they imagine  it will go on flowing in  that  direction. But  I cannot  help
thinking  that  the  Next Step will  be  really new; it  will  go  off  in a
direction you could never have dreamed  of. It would hardly be worth calling
a New  Step unless it did.  I should expect  not merely difference but a new
kind  of difference. I should expect not merely  change but a  new method of
producing the change. Or, to make an Irish  bull, I should expect  the  next
stage in Evolution not to be a stage in Evolution at  all: should expect the
Evolution itself  as a method  of producing change,  will be superseded. And
finally,  I should not be surprised  if, when  the thing happened, very  few
people noticed that it was happening.
     Now,  if  you care  to talk  in  these  terms, the  Christian  view  is
precisely that the Next Step  has already appeared. And it is really new. It
is not a  change from brainy  men to brainier men: it  is a change that goes
off in a totally different direction-a change from being creatures of God to
being sons of  God.  The  first  instance appeared in Palestine two thousand
years ago. In  a sense, the change is not "Evolution" at all,  because it is
not something arising out of the natural  process  of  events but  something
coming  into  nature  from  outside. But that  is what I should  expect.  We
arrived at our idea of "Evolution" from studying the past. If there are real
novelties in  store  then of course our  idea,  based on the past,  will not
really cover them. And in fact this New Step differs from all previous  ones
not only in coming from outside nature but in several other ways as well.
     (1)  It is not carried on by sexual reproduction. Need we  be surprised
at that? There was a time before sex had appeared; development used to go on
by different methods. Consequently, we might  have expected that there would
come a  time when  sex  disappeared,  or  else (which  is  what  is actually
happening) a time  when sex, though it continued to exist, ceased to  be the
main channel of development.
     (2) At the earlier stages living organisms have had either no choice or
very little choice about taking the  new step. Progress  was,  in the  main,
something  that happened to them, not  something that they  did. But the new
step, the  step from being creatures to being sons,  is voluntary. At least,
voluntary  in one  sense.  It  is  not  voluntary in  the sense  that we, of
ourselves, could have chosen to take it or could even have imagined  it; but
it is voluntary in the sense that when it is offered to us we can refuse it.
We  can, if we  please, shrink back: we can dig in our heels and let the new
Humanity go on without us.
     (3)  I  have called  Christ the "first instance" of the new man. But of
course He is something much more than  that. He is not merely a new man, one
specimen of the species, but the  new  man. He  is the origin and centre and
life of all the new men. He came into the created universe, of His own will,
bringing with Him  the Zoe, the new  life. (I mean  new to us, of course: in
its own place Zoe has existed for ever and ever.) And He transmits it not by
heredity but by what I have called "good  infection." Everyone  who  gets it
gets it  by personal contact with Him.  Other men become "new" by  being "in
Him."
     (4) This step  is taken  at a different  speed  from the previous ones.
Compared  with the development of man  on  this  planet,  the  diffusion  of
Christianity  over the human race seems to go  like a flash of lightning-for
two thousand years is almost nothing in the history  of the universe. (Never
forget that we are all  still "the early Christians." The present wicked and
wasteful divisions between us are, let us hope, a disease of infancy: we are
still  teething.  The outer  world, no doubt,  thinks just the  opposite. It
thinks we are dying  of  old age. But it has drought that  so  often before!
Again and again it has thought Christianity was dying, dying by persecutions
from without or corruptions from  within, by the rise of Mohammedanism,  the
rise   of  the  physical   sciences,  the  rise   of   great  anti-Christian
revolutionary movements. But every time the world has been disappointed. Its
first disappointment was over  the crucifixion. The Man came to  life again.
In a  sense-and  I  quite realise how  frightfully  unfair  it must seem  to
them-that has been happening ever since. They keep on killing the thing that
He started: and each time, just as  they are  patting down the  earth on its
grave, they suddenly  hear that it is still alive and has even broken out in
some new place. No wonder they hate us.)
     (5)  The  stakes are  higher.  By falling back at  the earlier steps  a
creature lost, at the worst, its few years of life on this earth: very often
it  did not lose  even  that. By falling back at this  step  we lose a prize
which is (in the strictest sense of the word) infinite. For now the critical
moment has arrived. Century by century God has guided nature up to the point
of producing  creatures which  can (if  they will) be  taken  right  out  of
nature,  turned  into  "gods." Will  they allow themselves to be taken? In a
way, it is like the crisis of birth. Until  we rise and follow Christ we are
still parts of Nature, still  in the womb of our great mother. Her pregnancy
has been long and painful and anxious, but  it has reached its  climax.  The
great moment has come. Everything is ready. The Doctor has arrived. Will the
birth "go off all right"? But of course it differs from an ordinary birth in
one important respect. In an ordinary birth the  baby  has not  much choice:
here it has. I wonder what an ordinary baby  would do if it  had the choice.
It might prefer to stay in the dark and warmth  and safety of  the womb. For
of course it would  think the womb meant safety. That would be just where it
was wrong; for if it stays there it will die.
     On this view the thing has happened: the new step has been taken and is
being taken. Already  the new men  are dotted here  and  there all over  the
earth. Some, as I have  admitted, are still  hardly recognisable: but others
can be recognised. Every now and then one  meets them. Their very voices and
faces  are different from  ours;  stronger, quieter,  happier, more radiant.
They begin where most of us leave off.  They  are, I say, recognisable;  but
you  must know  what to look  for.  They will not  be very like the  idea of
"religious people" which you have formed from your  general reading. They do
not draw  attention to themselves. You tend to think that you are being kind
to them when they are  really  being  kind to  you. They love  you more than
other men  do,  but  they need  you less. (We must get over  wanting  to  be
needed: in  some goodish people, specially women, that is the hardest of all
temptations to  resist.) They will usually seem to have  a lot of  time: you
will wonder  where  it comes from. When you have recognised one of them, you
will  recognise the next one much more easily. And  I  strongly suspect (but
how  should  I  know?)  that  they recognise  one  another  immediately  and
infallibly,  across  every barrier of  colour, sex, class, age, and even  of
creeds. In that way, to become holy is rather like joining a secret society.
To put it at the very lowest, it must be great fun.
     But you must not imagine  that the new men are,  in the ordinary sense,
all  alike. A good deal of what I  have been saying in this  last book might
make  you  suppose  that  that  was bound to be so. To become new  men means
losing what we now call "ourselves." Out of ourselves,  into Christ, we must
go. His will is to become ours and  we are to  think His  thoughts, to "have
the mind of Christ" as the Bible  says. And if  Christ is  one, and if He is
thus to be  "in"  us  all,  shall we  not be  exactly the same? It certainly
sounds like it; but in fact it is not so.
     It is difficult here to get a good illustration; because, of course, no
other two things are related to each other just as the Creator is related to
one of His creatures.  But I will try two very imperfect illustrations which
may give a hint of  the truth. Imagine a lot of people who have always lived
in the dark. You  come and try to describe to them  what  light is like. You
might tell them that if they come into the light  that same light would fall
on  them  all  and they  would all reflect it and thus become  what we  call
visible. Is it not  quite possible that they would imagine that, since  they
were  all receiving  the same light, and all  reacting to it in the same way
(i.e., all reflecting it), they would all look alike? Whereas you and I know
that the light will in  fact bring out, or show up, how different they  are.
Or again, suppose a person who knew nothing about salt. You give him a pinch
to taste and he experiences a particular  strong, sharp taste. You then tell
him that in your country people use  salt in all their cookery. Might he not
reply  "In  that case I  suppose  all your dishes taste  exactly  the  same:
because the taste of that  stuff you have just given me is so strong that it
will kill the taste of  everything else."  But you and I know that the  real
effect of salt is exactly the opposite. So far from killing the taste of the
egg and the tripe and  the cabbage,  it actually brings it  out. They do not
show their real taste till you have  added the salt. (Of course, as I warned
you, this is  not really a  very  good illustration, because you can,  after
all, kill the other  tastes by putting in too much salt, whereas  you cannot
kill the  taste of a human  personality by putting in too much  Christ. I am
doing the best I can.)
     It is something like that with Christ  and us. The more  we get what we
now call "ourselves" out of the way and let Him take us over, the more truly
ourselves we become. There  is so much  of Him that millions and millions of
"little Christs," all different, will still be too few to express Him fully.
He made them all. He invented-as an author invents characters in a novel-all
the different men that you and I were intended to be. In that sense our real
selves are all waiting for  us in Him. It is  no good trying to  "be myself"
without Him.  The  more I resist Him and  try to  live on my own, the more I
become dominated  by  my own heredity and  upbringing  and surroundings  and
natural desires. In fact what I so proudly call "Myself" becomes  merely the
meeting place for trains of events which I never  started and which I cannot
stop.  What I call "My  wishes" become merely  the desires thrown up  by  my
physical  organism  or  pumped  into  me  by other men's  thoughts  or  even
suggested to me by devils. Eggs and alcohol and a good night's sleep will be
the real  origins  of what I flatter  myself  by regarding as my own  highly
personal and discriminating decision to make love to the girl opposite to me
in the railway carriage. Propaganda will be the real origin of what I regard
as  my own personal political  ideals, I am not, in my natural state, nearly
so much of a person as  I like to believe: most  of what I call "me" can  be
very easily explained. It is when I turn to Christ, when I give myself up to
His Personality, that I first begin to have a real personality of my own. At
the beginning I said there were Personalities in God. I will go further now.
There are no real personalities anywhere else. Until  you have given up your
self  to Him you will not have a  real self.  Sameness is to  be  found most
among the most "natural" men, not among  those who surrender to Christ.  How
monotonously alike  all  the great  tyrants  and conquerors have  been:  how
gloriously different are the saints.
     But there must  be a real giving up of the self. You must throw it away
"blindly" so to speak. Christ will indeed give  you a real  personality: but
you must not go to Him for the sake of that. As long as your own personality
is what you  are bothering  about you are not going to Him at  all. The very
first step is  to  try to forget  about the self altogether.  Your real, new
self (which is  Christ's and also yours, and yours just because it  is  His)
will  not come as  long as you are looking for it. It will come when you are
looking for Him. Does  that sound  strange?  The  same  principle holds, you
know, for more everyday  matters. Even in social life, you will never make a
good impression on other  people until you stop thinking about what  sort of
impression  you are making.  Even in literature and art,  no man who bothers
about originality  will ever be original: whereas if you  simply try to tell
the truth (without caring twopence how  often it  has  been told before) you
will, nine times out of ten, become original without ever having noticed it.
The principle runs through all life from top to bottom. Give up  your  self,
and you will  find  your  real self.  Lose  your life and  you will save it.
Submit to death, death of your  ambitions and favourite wishes every day and
death of your whole body in the end: submit with every fibre of  your being,
and you will find eternal life. Keep back nothing. Nothing that you have not
given away will ever be  really yours. Nothing in you that has not died will
ever be  raised from  the dead. Look for  yourself, and you will find in the
long run only hatred,  loneliness, despair,  rage, ruin, and decay. But look
for Christ and you will find Him, and with Him everything else thrown in.
There was a boy called Eustace Clarence Scrubb, and he almost deserved it. His parents called him Eustace Clarence and masters called him Scrubb. I can't tell you how his friends spoke to him, for he had none. He didn't call his Father and Mother "Father" and "Mother", but Harold and Alberta. They were very up-to-date and advanced people. They were vegetarians, non-smokers and teetotallers and wore a special kind of underclothes. In their house there was very little furniture and very few clothes on the beds and the windows were always open.
Eustace Clarence liked animals, especially beetles, if they were dead and pinned on a card. He liked books if they were books of information and had pictures of grain elevators or of fat foreign children doing exercises in model schools.
Eustace Clarence disliked his cousins the four Pevensies, Peter, Susan, Edmund and Lucy. But he was quite glad when he heard that Edmund and Lucy were coming to stay. For deep down inside him he liked bossing and bullying; and, though he was a puny little person who couldn't have stood up even to Lucy, let alone Edmund, in a fight, he knew that there are dozens of ways to give people a bad time if you are in your own home and they are only visitors.
Edmund and Lucy did not at all want to come and stay with Uncle Harold and Aunt Alberta. But it really couldn't be helped. Father had got a job lecturing in America for sixteen weeks that summer, and Mother was to go with him because she hadn't had a real holiday for ten years. Peter was working very hard for an exam and he was to spend the holidays being coached by old Professor Kirke in whose house these four children had had wonderful adventures long ago in the war years. If he had still been in that house he would have had them all to stay. But he had somehow become poor since the old days and was living in a small cottage with only one bedroom to spare. It would have cost too much money to take the other three all to America, and Susan had gone. Grown-ups thought her the pretty one of the family and she was no good at school work (though otherwise very old for her age) and Mother said she "would get far more out of a trip to America than the youngsters". Edmund and Lucy tried not to grudge Susan her luck, but it was dreadful having to spend the summer holidays at their Aunt's. "But it's far worse for me," said Edmund, "because you'll at least have a room of your own and I shall have to share a bedroom with that record stinker, Eustace."
The story begins on an afternoon when Edmund and Lucy were stealing a few precious minutes alone together. And of course they were talking about Narnia, which was the name of their own private and secret country. Most of us, I suppose, have a secret country but for most of us it is only an imaginary country. Edmund and Lucy were luckier than other people in that respect. Their secret country was real. They had already visited it twice; not in a game or a dream, but in reality. They had got there of course by Magic, which is the only way of getting to Narnia. And a promise, or very nearly a promise, had been made them in Narnia itself that they would some day get back. You may imagine that they talked about it a good deal, when they got the chance.
They were in Lucy's room, sitting on the edge of her bed and looking at a picture on the opposite wall. It was the only picture in the house that they liked. Aunt Alberta didn't like it at all (that was why it was put away in a little back room upstairs), but she couldn't get rid of it because it had been a wedding present from someone she did not want to offend.
It was a picture of a ship—a ship sailing nearly straight towards you. Her prow was gilded and shaped like the head of a dragon with wide open mouth. She had only one mast and one large, square sail which was a rich purple. The sides of the ship—what you could see of them where the gilded wings of the dragon ended—were green. She had just run up to the top of one glorious blue wave, and the nearer slope of that wave came down towards you, with streaks and bubbles on it. She was obviously running fast before a gay wind, listing over a little on her port side. (By the way, if you are going to read this story at all, and if you don't know already, you had better get it into your head that the left of a ship when you are looking ahead, is port, and the right is starboard.) All the sunlight fell on her from that side, and the water on that side was full of greens and purples. On the other, it was darker blue from the shadow of the ship.
"The question is," said Edmund, "whether it doesn't make things worse, looking at a Narnian ship when you can't get there."
"Even looking is better than nothing," said Lucy. "And she is such a very Narnian ship."
"Still playing your old game?" said Eustace Clarence, who had been listening outside the door and now came grinning into the room. Last year, when he had been staying with the Pevensies, he had managed to hear them all talking of Narnia and he loved teasing them about it. He thought of course that they were making it all up; and as he was far too stupid to make anything up himself, he did not approve of that.
"You're not wanted here," said Edmund curtly.
"I'm trying to think of a limerick," said Eustace. "Something like this:
"Some kids who played games about Narnia
Got gradually balmier and balmier——"
"Well, Narnia and balmier don't rhyme, to begin with," said Lucy.
"It's an assonance," said Eustace.
"Don't ask him what an assy-thingummy is," said Edmund. "He's only longing to be asked. Say nothing and perhaps he'll go away."
Most boys, on meeting a reception like this, would either have cleared out or flared up. Eustace did neither. He just hung about grinning, and presently began talking again.
"Do you like that picture?" he asked.
"For Heaven's sake don't let him get started about Art and all that," said Edmund hurriedly, but Lucy, who was very truthful, had already said, "Yes, I do. I like it very much."
"It's a rotten picture," said Eustace.
"You won't see it if you step outside," said Edmund.
"Why do you like it?" said Eustace to Lucy.
"Well, for one thing," said Lucy, "I like it because the ship looks as if it was really moving. And the water looks as if it was really wet. And the waves look as if they were really going up and down."
Of course Eustace knew lots of answers to this, but he didn't say anything. The reason was that at that very moment he looked at the waves and saw that they did look very much indeed as if they were going up and down. He had only once been in a ship (and then only as far as the Isle of Wight) and had been horribly seasick. The look of the waves in the picture made him feel sick again. He turned rather green and tried another look. And then all three children were staring with open mouths.
What they were seeing may be hard to believe when you read it in print, but it was almost as hard to believe when you saw it happening. The things in the picture were moving. It didn't look at all like a cinema either; the colours were too real and clean and out-of-door for that. Down went the prow of the ship into the wave and up went a great shock of spray. And then up went the wave behind her, and her stern and her deck became visible for the first time, and then disappeared as the next wave came to meet her and her bows went up again. At the same moment an exercise book which had been lying beside Edmund on the bed flapped, rose and sailed through the air to the wall behind him, and Lucy felt all her hair whipping round her face as it does on a windy day. And this was a windy day; but the wind was blowing out of the picture towards them. And suddenly with the wind came the noises—the swishing of waves and the slap of water against the ship's sides and the creaking and the over-all high, steady roar of air and water. But it was the smell, the wild, briny smell, which really convinced Lucy that she was not dreaming.
"Stop it," came Eustace's voice, squeaky with fright and bad temper. "It's some silly trick you two are playing. Stop it. I'll tell Alberta—ow!"
The other two were much more accustomed to adventures, but, just exactly as Eustace Clarence said "Ow," they both said "Ow" too. The reason was that a great cold, salt splash had broken right out of the frame and they were breathless from the smack of it, besides being wet through.
"I'll smash the rotten thing," cried Eustace; and then several things happened at the same time. Eustace rushed towards the picture. Edmund, who knew something about magic, sprang after him, warning him to look out and not to be a fool. Lucy grabbed at him from the other side and was dragged forward. And by this time either they had grown much smaller or the picture had grown bigger. Eustace jumped to try to pull it off the wall and found himself standing on the frame; in front of him was not glass but real sea, and wind and waves rushing up to the frame as they might to a rock. He lost his head and clutched at the other two who had jumped up beside him. There was a second of struggling and shouting, and just as they thought they had got their balance a great blue roller surged up round them, swept them off their feet, and drew them down into the sea. Eustace's despairing cry suddenly ended as the water got into his mouth.
Lucy thanked her stars that she had worked hard at her swimming last summer term. It is true that she would have got on much better if she had used a slower stroke, and also that the water felt a great deal colder than it had looked while it was only a picture. Still, she kept her head and kicked her shoes off, as everyone ought to do who falls into deep water in their clothes. She even kept her mouth shut and her eyes open. They were still quite near the ship; she saw its green side towering high above them, and people looking at her from the deck. Then, as one might have expected, Eustace clutched at her in a panic and down they both went.
When they came up again she saw a white figure diving off the ship's side. Edmund was close beside her now, treading water, and had caught the arms of the howling Eustace. Then someone else, whose face was vaguely familiar, slipped an arm under her from the other side. There was a lot of shouting going on from the ship, heads crowding together above the bulwarks, ropes being thrown. Edmund and the stranger were fastening ropes round her. After that followed what seemed a very long delay during which her face got blue and her teeth began chattering. In reality the delay was not very long; they were waiting till the moment when she could be got on board the ship without being dashed against its side. Even with all their best endeavours she had a bruised knee when she finally stood, dripping and shivering, on the deck. After her Edmund was heaved up, and then the miserable Eustace. Last of all came the stranger—a golden-headed boy some years older than herself.
"Ca—Ca—Caspian!" gasped Lucy as soon as she had breath enough. For Caspian it was; Caspian, the boy king of Narnia whom they had helped to set on the throne during their last visit. Immediately Edmund recognised him too. All three shook hands and clapped one another on the back with great delight.
"But who is your friend?" said Caspian almost at once, turning to Eustace with his cheerful smile. But Eustace was crying much harder than any boy of his age has a right to cry when nothing worse than a wetting has happened to him, and would only yell out, "Let me go. Let me go back. I don't like it."
"Let you go?" said Caspian. "But where?"
Eustace rushed to the ship's side, as if he expected to see the picture frame hanging above the sea, and perhaps a glimpse of Lucy's bedroom. What he saw was blue waves flecked with foam, and paler blue sky, both spreading without a break to the horizon. Perhaps we can hardly blame him if his heart sank. He was promptly sick.
"Hey! Rynelf," said Caspian to one of the sailors. "Bring spiced wine for their Majesties. You'll need something to warm you after that dip." He called Edmund and Lucy their Majesties because they and Peter and Susan had all been Kings and Queens of Narnia long before his time. Narnian time flows differently from ours. If you spent a hundred years in Narnia, you would still come back to our world at the very same hour of the very same day on which you left. And then, if you went back to Narnia after spending a week here, you might find that a thousand Narnian years had passed, or only a day, or no time at all. You never know till you get there. Consequently, when the Pevensie children had returned to Narnia last time for their second visit, it was (for the Narnians) as if King Arthur came back to Britain, as some people say he will. And I say the sooner the better.
Rynelf returned with the spiced wine steaming in a flagon and four silver cups. It was just what one wanted, and as Lucy and Edmund sipped it they could feel the warmth going right down to their toes. But Eustace made faces and spluttered and spat it out and was sick again and began to cry again and asked if they hadn't any Plumptree's Vitaminised Nerve Food and could it be made with distilled water and anyway he insisted on being put ashore at the next station.
"This is a merry shipmate you've brought us, Brother," whispered Caspian to Edmund with a chuckle; but before he could say anything more Eustace burst out again.
"Oh! Ugh! What on earth's that! Take it away, the horrid thing."
He really had some excuse this time for feeling a little surprised. Something very curious indeed had come out of the cabin in the poop and was slowly approaching them. You might call it—and indeed it was—a Mouse. But then it was a Mouse on its hind legs and stood about two feet high. A thin band of gold passed round its head under one ear and over the other and in this was stuck a long crimson feather. (As the Mouse's fur was very dark, almost black, the effect was bold and striking.) Its left paw rested on the hilt of a sword very nearly as long as its tail. Its balance, as it paced gravely along the swaying deck, was perfect, and its manners courtly. Lucy and Edmund recognised it at once—Reepicheep, the most valiant of all the Talking Beasts of Narnia and the Chief Mouse. It had won undying glory in the second Battle of Beruna. Lucy longed, as she had always done, to take Reepicheep up in her arms and cuddle him. But this, as she well knew, was a pleasure she could never have: it would have offended him deeply. Instead, she went down on one knee to talk to him.
Reepicheep put forward his left leg, drew back his right, bowed, kissed her hand, straightened himself, twirled his whiskers, and said in his shrill, piping voice:
"My humble duty to your Majesty. And to King Edmund, too." (Here he bowed again.) "Nothing except your Majesties' presence was lacking to this glorious venture."
"Ugh, take it away," wailed Eustace. "I hate mice. And I never could bear performing animals. They're silly and vulgar and—and sentimental."
"Am I to understand," said Reepicheep to Lucy after a long stare at Eustace, "that this singularly discourteous person is under your Majesty's protection? Because, if not——"
At this moment Lucy and Edmund both sneezed.
"What a fool I am to keep you all standing here in your wet things," said Caspian. "Come on below and get changed. I'll give you up my cabin of course, Lucy, but I'm afraid we have no women's clothes on board. You'll have to make do with some of mine. Lead the way, Reepicheep, like a good fellow."
"To the convenience of a lady," said Reepicheep, "even a question of honour must give way—at least for the moment——" and here he looked very hard at Eustace. But Caspian hustled them on and in a few minutes Lucy found herself passing through the door into the stern cabin. She fell in love with it at once—the three square windows that looked out on the blue, swirling water astern, the low cushioned benches round three sides of the table, the swinging silver lamp overhead (Dwarfs' work, she knew at once by its exquisite delicacy) and the flat gold image of Aslan the Lion on the forward wall above the door. All this she took in in a flash, for Caspian immediately opened a door on the starboard side, and said, "This'll be your room, Lucy. I'll just get some dry things for myself"—he was rummaging in one of the lockers while he spoke—"and then leave you to change. If you'll fling your wet things outside the door I'll get them taken to the galley to be dried."
Lucy found herself as much at home as if she had been in Caspian's cabin for weeks, and the motion of the ship did not worry her, for in the old days when she had been a queen in Narnia she had done a good deal of voyaging. The cabin was very tiny but bright with painted panels (all birds and beasts and crimson dragons and vines) and spotlessly clean. Caspian's clothes were too big for her, but she could manage. His shoes, sandals and sea-boots were hopelessly big but she did not mind going barefoot on board ship. When she had finished dressing she looked out of her window at the water rushing past and took in long deep breath. She felt quite sure they were in for a lovely time.
"Ah, there you are, Lucy," said Caspian. "We were just waiting for you. This is my captain, the Lord Drinian."
A dark-haired man went down on one knee and kissed her hand. The only others present were Reepicheep and Edmund.
"Where is Eustace?" asked Lucy.
"In bed," said Edmund, "and I don't think we can do anything for him. It only makes him worse if you try to be nice to him."
"Meanwhile," said Caspian, "we want to talk."
"By Jove, we do," said Edmund. "And first, about time. It's a year ago by our time since we left you just before your coronation. How long has it been in Narnia?"
"Exactly three years," said Caspian.
"All going well?" asked Edmund.
"You don't suppose I'd have left my kingdom and put to sea unless all was well," answered the King. "It couldn't be better. There's no trouble at all now between Telmarines, Dwarfs, Talking Beasts, Fauns and the rest. And we gave those troublesome giants on the frontier such a good beating last summer that they pay us tribute now. And I had an excellent person to leave as Regent while I'm away—Trumpkin, the Dwarf. You remember him?"
"Dear Trumpkin," said Lucy, "of course I do. You couldn't have made a better choice."
"Loyal as a badger, Ma'am, and valiant as—as a Mouse," said Drinian. He had been going to say "as a lion" but had noticed Reepicheep's eyes fixed on him.
"And where are we heading for?" asked Edmund.
"Well," said Caspian, "that's rather a long story. Perhaps you remember that when I was a child my usurping uncle Miraz got rid of seven friends of my father's (who might have taken my part) by sending them off to explore the unknown Eastern Seas beyond the Lone Islands."
"Yes," said Lucy, "and none of them ever came back."
"Right. Well, on my coronation day, with Aslan's approval, I swore an oath that, if once I established peace in Narnia, I would sail east myself for a year and a day to find my father's friends or to learn of their deaths and avenge them if I could. These were their names—the Lord Revilian, the Lord Bern, the Lord Argoz, the Lord Mavramorn, the Lord Octesian, the Lord Restimar, and—oh, that other one who's so hard to remember."
"The Lord Rhoop, Sire," said Drinian.
"Rhoop, Rhoop, of course," said Caspian. "That is my main intention. But Reepicheep here has an even higher hope." Everyone's eyes turned to the Mouse.
"As high as my spirit," it said. "Though perhaps as small as my stature. Why should we not come to the very eastern end of the world? And what might we find there? I expect to find Aslan's own country. It is always from the east, across the sea, that the great Lion comes to us."
"I say, that is an idea," said Edmund in an awed voice.
"But do you think," said Lucy, "Aslan's country would be that sort of country—I mean, the sort you could ever sail to?"
"I do not know, Madam," said Reepicheep. "But there is this. When I was in my cradle a wood woman, a Dryad, spoke this verse over me:
"Where sky and water meet,
Where the waves grow sweet,
Doubt not, Reepicheep,
To find all you seek,
There is the utter East.
"I do not know what it means. But the spell of it has been on me all my life."
After a short silence Lucy asked, "And where are we now, Caspian?"
"The Captain can tell you better than I," said Caspian, so Drinian got out his chart and spread it on the table.
"That's our position," he said, laying his finger on it. "Or was at noon to-day. We had a fair wind from Cair Paravel and stood a little north for Galma, which we made on the next day. We were in port for a week, for the Duke of Galma made a great tournament for His Majesty and there he unhorsed many knights——"
"And got a few nasty falls myself, Drinian. Some of the bruises are there still," put in Caspian.
"—And unhorsed many knights," repeated Drinian with a grin. "We thought the Duke would have been pleased if the King's Majesty would have married his daughter, but nothing came of that——"
"Squints, and has freckles," said Caspian.
"Oh, poor girl," said Lucy.
"And we sailed from Galma," continued Drinian, "and ran into a calm for the best of two days and had to row, and then had wind again and did not make Terebinthia till the fourth day from Galma. And there their King sent out a warning not to land for there was sickness in Terebinthia, but we doubled the cape and put in at a little creek far from the city and watered. Then we had to lie off for three days before we got a south-east wind and stood out for Seven Isles. The third day out a pirate (Terebinthian by her rig) overhauled us, but when she saw us well armed she stood off after some shooting of arrows on either part——"
"And we ought to have given her chase and boarded her and hanged every mother's son of them," said Reepicheep.
"—And in five days more we were in sight of Muil which, as you know, is the westernmost of the Seven Isles. Then we rowed through the straits and came about sundown into Redhaven on the isle of Brenn, where we were very lovingly feasted and had victual and water at will. We left Redhaven six days ago and have made marvellously good speed, so that I hope to see the Lone Islands the day after to-morrow. The sum is, we are now nearly thirty days at sea and have sailed more than four hundred leagues from Narnia."
"And after the Lone Islands?" said Lucy.
"No one knows, your Majesty," answered Drinian. "Unless the Lone Islanders themselves can tell us."
"They couldn't in our days," said Edmund.
"Then," said Reepicheep, "it is after the Lone Islands that the adventure really begins."
Caspian now suggested that they might like to be shown over the ship before supper, but Lucy's conscience smote her and she said, "I think I really must go and see Eustace. Seasickness is horrid, you know. If I had my old cordial with me I could cure him."
"But you have," said Caspian. "I'd quite forgotten about it. As you left it behind I thought it might be regarded as one of the royal treasures and so I brought it—if you think it ought to be wasted on a thing like seasickness."
"It'll only take a drop," said Lucy.
Caspian opened one of the lockers beneath the bench and brought out the beautiful little diamond flask which Lucy remembered so well. "Take back your own, Queen," he said. They then left the cabin and went out into the sunshine.
In the deck there were two large, long hatches, fore and aft of the mast, and both open, as they always were in fair weather, to let light and air into the belly of the ship. Caspian led them down a ladder into the after hatch. Here they found themselves in a place where benches for rowing ran from side to side and the light came in through the oar-holes and danced on the roof. Of course Caspian's ship was not that horrible thing, a galley rowed by slaves. Oars were used only when wind failed or for getting in and out of harbour and everyone (except Reepicheep whose legs were too short) had often taken a turn. At each side of the ship the space under the benches was left clear for the rowers' feet, but all down the centre there was a kind of pit which went down to the very keel and this was filled with all kinds of things—sacks of flour, casks of water and beer, barrels of pork, jars of honey, skin bottles of wine, apples, nuts, cheeses, biscuits, turnips, sides of bacon. From the roof—that is, from the under side of the deck—hung hams and strings of onions, and also the men of the watch off-duty in their hammocks. Caspian led them aft, stepping from bench to bench; at least, it was stepping for him, and something between a step and a jump for Lucy, and a real long jump for Reepicheep. In this way they came to a partition with a door in it. Caspian opened the door and led them into a cabin which filled the stern underneath the deck cabins in the poop. It was of course not so nice. It was very low and the sides sloped together as they went down so that there was hardly any floor; and though it had windows of thick glass, they were not made to open because they were under water. In fact at this very moment, as the ship pitched they were alternately golden with sunlight and dim green with the sea.
"You and I must lodge here, Edmund," said Caspian. "We'll leave your kinsman the bunk and sling hammocks for ourselves."
"I beseech your Majesty——" said Drinian.
"No, no, shipmate," said Caspian, "we have argued all that out already. You and Rhince" (Rhince was the mate) "are sailing the ship and will have cares and labours many a night when we are singing catches or telling stories, so you and he must have the port cabin above. King Edmund and I can lie very snug here below. But how is the stranger?"
Eustace, very green in the face, scowled and asked whether there was any sign of the storm getting less. But Caspian said, "What storm?" and Drinian burst out laughing.
"Storm, young master!" he roared. "This is as fair weather as a man could ask for."
"Who's that?" said Eustace irritably. "Send him away. His voice goes through my head."
"I've brought you something that will make you feel better, Eustace," said Lucy.
"Oh, go away and leave me alone," growled Eustace. But he took a drop from her flask, and though he said it was beastly stuff (the smell in the cabin when she opened it was delicious) it is certain that his face came the right colour a few moments after he had swallowed it, and he must have felt better because, instead of wailing about the storm and his head, he began demanding to be put ashore and said that at the first port he would "lodge a disposition" against them all with the British Consul. But when Reepicheep asked what a disposition was and how you lodged it (Reepicheep thought it was some new way of arranging a single combat) Eustace could only reply, "Fancy not knowing that." In the end they succeeded in convincing Eustace that they were already sailing as fast as they could towards the nearest land they knew, and that they had no more power of sending him back to Cambridge—which was where Uncle Harold lived—than of sending him to the moon. After that he sulkily agreed to put on the fresh clothes which had been put out for him and come on deck.
Caspian now showed them over the ship, though indeed they had seen most of it already. They went up on the forecastle and saw the look-out man standing on a little shelf inside the gilded dragon's neck and peering through its open mouth. Inside the forecastle was the galley (or ship's kitchen) and quarters for such people as the boatswain, the carpenter, the cook and the master-archer. If you think it odd to have the galley in the bows and imagine the smoke from its chimney streaming back over the ship, that is because you are thinking of steamships where there is always a headwind. On a sailing ship the wind is coming from behind, and anything smelly is put as far forward as possible. They were taken up to the fighting top, and at first it was rather alarming to rock to and fro there and see the deck looking small and far away beneath. You realised that if you fell there was no particular reason why you should fall on board rather than in the sea. Then they were taken to the poop, where Rhince was on duty with another man at the great tiller, and behind that the dragon's tail rose up, covered with gilding, and round inside it ran a little bench. The name of the ship was Dawn Treader. She was only a little bit of a thing compared with one of our ships, or even with the cogs, dromonds, carracks and galleons which Narnia had owned when Lucy and Edmund had reigned there under Peter as the High King, for nearly all navigation had died out in the reigns of Caspian's ancestors. When his uncle, Miraz the usurper, had sent the seven lords to sea, they had had to buy a Galmian ship and man it with hired Galmian sailors. But now Caspian had begun to teach the Narnians to be once more sea-faring folk, and the Dawn Treader was the finest ship he had built yet. She was so small that, forward of the mast, there was hardly any deck room between the central hatch and the ship's boat on one side and the hen-coop (Lucy fed the hens) on the other. But she was a beauty of her kind, a "lady" as sailors say, her lines perfect, her colours pure, and every spar and rope and pin lovingly made. Eustace of course would be pleased with nothing, and kept on boasting about liners and motor-boats and aeroplanes and submarines ("As if he knew anything about them," muttered Edmund), but the other two were delighted with the Dawn Treader, and when they turned aft to the cabin and supper, and saw the whole western sky lit up with an immense crimson sunset, and felt the quiver of the ship, and tasted the salt on their lips, and thought of unknown lands on the Eastern rim of the world, Lucy felt that she was almost too happy to speak.
What Eustace thought had best be told in his own words, for when they all got their clothes back, dried, next morning, he at once got out a little black notebook and a pencil and started to keep a diary. He always had this notebook with him and kept a record of his marks in it, for though he didn't care much about any subject for its own sake, he cared a great deal about marks and would even go to people and say, "I got so much. What did you get?" But as he didn't seem likely to get many marks on the Dawn Treader he now started a diary. This was the first entry.
"August 7th. Have now been 24 hours on this ghastly boat if it isn't a dream. All the time a frightful storm has been raging (it's a good thing I'm not seasick). Huge waves keep coming in over the front and I have seen the boat nearly go under any number of times. All the others pretend to take no notice of this, either from swank or because Harold says one of the most cowardly things ordinary people do is to shut their eyes to Facts. It's madness to come out into the sea in a rotten little thing like this. Not much bigger than a lifeboat. And, of course, absolutely primitive indoors. No proper saloon, no radio, no bathrooms, no deck-chairs. I was dragged all over it yesterday evening and it would make anyone sick to hear Caspian showing off his funny little toy boat as if it was the Queen Mary. I tried to tell him what real ships are like, but he's too dense. E. and L., of course, didn't back me up. I suppose a kid like L. doesn't realise the danger and E. is buttering up C. as everyone does here. They call him a King. I said I was a Republican but he had to ask me what that meant! He doesn't seem to know anything at all. Needless to say I've been put in the worst cabin of the boat, a perfect dungeon, and Lucy has been given a whole room on deck to herself, almost a nice room compared with the rest of this place. C. says that's because she's a girl. I tried to make him see what Alberta says, that all that sort of thing is really lowering girls but he was too dense. Still, he might see that I shall be ill if I'm kept in that hole any longer. E. says we mustn't grumble because C. is sharing it with us himself to make room for L. As if that didn't make it more crowded and far worse. Nearly forgot to say that there is also a kind of Mouse thing that gives everyone the most frightful cheek. The others can put up with it if they like but I shall twist his tail pretty soon if he tries it on me. The food is frightful too."
The trouble between Eustace and Reepicheep arrived even sooner than might have been expected. Before dinner next day, when the others were sitting round the table waiting (being at sea gives one a magnificent appetite), Eustace came rushing in, wringing his hand and shouting out:
"That little brute has half killed me. I insist on it being kept under control. I could bring an action against you, Caspian. I could order you to have it destroyed."
At the same moment Reepicheep appeared. His sword was drawn and his whiskers looked very fierce but he was as polite as ever.
"I ask your pardons all," he said, "and especially her Majesty's. If I had known that he would take refuge here I would have awaited a more reasonable time for his correction."
"What on earth's up?" asked Edmund.
What had really happened was this. Reepicheep, who never felt that the ship was getting on fast enough, loved to sit on the bulwarks far forward just beside the dragon's head, gazing out at the eastern horizon and singing softly in his little chirruping voice the song the Dryad had made for him. He never held on to anything, however the ship pitched, and kept his balance with perfect ease; perhaps his long tail, hanging down to the deck inside the bulwarks, made this easier. Everyone on board was familiar with this habit, and the sailors liked it because when one was on look-out duty it gave one somebody to talk to. Why exactly Eustace had slipped and reeled and stumbled all the way forward to the forecastle (he had not yet got his sea-legs) I never heard. Perhaps he hoped he would see land, or perhaps he wanted to hang about the galley and scrounge something. Anyway, as soon as he saw that long tail hanging down—and perhaps it was rather tempting—he thought it would be delightful to catch hold of it, swing Reepicheep round by it once or twice upside-down, then run away and laugh. At first the plan seemed to work beautifully. The Mouse was not much heavier than a very large cat. Eustace had him off the rail in a trice and very silly he looked (thought Eustace) with his little limbs all splayed out and his mouth open. But unfortunately Reepicheep, who had fought for his life many a time, never lost his head even for a moment. Nor his skill. It is not very easy to draw one's sword when one is swinging round in the air by one's tail, but he did. And the next thing Eustace knew was two agonising jabs in his hand which made him let go of the tail; and the next thing after that was that the Mouse had picked itself up again as if it were a ball bouncing off the deck, and there it was facing him, and a horrid long, bright, sharp thing like a skewer was waving to and fro within an inch of his stomach. (This doesn't count as below the belt for mice in Narnia because they can hardly be expected to reach higher.)
"Stop it," spluttered Eustace, "go away. Put that thing away. It's not safe. Stop it, I say. I'll tell Caspian. I'll have you muzzled and tied up."
"Why do you not draw your own sword, poltroon!" cheeped the Mouse. "Draw and fight or I'll beat you black and blue with the flat."
"I haven't got one," said Eustace. "I'm a pacifist. I don't believe in fighting."
"Do I understand," said Reepicheep, withdrawing his sword for a moment and speaking very sternly, "that you do not intend to give me satisfaction?"
"I don't know what you mean," said Eustace, nursing his hand. "If you don't know how to take a joke I shan't bother my head about you."
"Then take that," said Reepicheep, "and that—to teach you manners—and the respect due to a knight—and a Mouse—and a Mouse's tail——" and at each word he gave Eustace a blow with the side of his rapier, which was thin, fine dwarf-tempered steel and as supple and effective as a birch rod. Eustace (of course) was at a school where they didn't have corporal punishment, so the sensation was quite new to him. That was why, in spite of having no sea-legs, it took him less than a minute to get off that forecastle and cover the whole length of the deck and burst in at the cabin door—still hotly pursued by Reepicheep. Indeed it seemed to Eustace that the rapier as well as the pursuit was hot. It might have been red-hot by the feel.
There was not much difficulty in settling the matter once Eustace realised that everyone took the idea of a duel quite seriously and heard Caspian offering to lend him a sword, and Drinian and Edmund discussing whether he ought to be handicapped in some way to make up for his being so much bigger than Reepicheep. He apologised sulkily and went off with Lucy to have his hand bathed and bandaged and then went to his bunk. He was careful to lie on his side.
"Land in sight," shouted the man in the bows.
Lucy, who had been talking to Rhince on the poop, came pattering down the ladder and raced forward. As she went she was joined by Edmund, and they found Caspian, Drinian and Reepicheep already on the forecastle. It was a coldish morning, the sky very pale and the sea very dark blue with little white caps of foam, and there, a little way off on the starboard bow, was the nearest of the Lone Islands, Felimath, like a low green hill in the sea, and behind it, further off, the grey slopes of its sister Doorn.
"Same old Felimath! Same old Doorn," said Lucy, clapping her hands. "Oh—Edmund, how long it is since you and I saw them last!"
"I've never understood why they belong to Narnia," said Caspian. "Did Peter the High King conquer them?"
"Oh no," said Edmund. "They were Narnian before our time—in the days of the White Witch."
(By the way, I have never yet heard how these remote islands became attached to the crown of Narnia; if I ever do, and if the story is at all interesting, I may put it in some other book.)
"Are we to put in here, Sire?" asked Drinian.
"I shouldn't think it would be much good landing on Felimath," said Edmund. "It was almost uninhabited in our days and it looks as if it was the same still. The people lived mostly on Doorn and a little on Avra—that's the third one; you can't see it yet. They only kept sheep on Felimath."
"Then we'll have to double that cape, I suppose," said Drinian, "and land on Doorn. That'll mean rowing."
"I'm sorry we're not landing on Felimath," said Lucy. "I'd like to walk there again. It was so lonely—a nice kind of loneliness, and all grass and clover and soft sea air."
"I'd love to stretch my legs too," said Caspian. "I tell you what. Why shouldn't we go ashore in the boat and send it back, and then we could walk across Felimath and let the Dawn Treader pick us up on the other side?"
If Caspian had been as experienced then as he became later on in this voyage he would not have made this suggestion; but at the moment it seemed an excellent one. "Oh do let's," said Lucy.
"You'll come, will you?" said Caspian to Eustace, who had come on deck with his hand bandaged.
"Anything to get off this blasted boat," said Eustace.
"Blasted?" said Drinian. "How do you mean?"
"In a civilised country like where I come from," said Eustace, "the ships are so big that when you're inside you wouldn't know you were at sea at all."
"In that case you might just as well stay ashore," said Caspian. "Will you tell them to lower the boat, Drinian."
The King, the Mouse, the two Pevensies, and Eustace all got into the boat and were pulled to the beach of Felimath. When the boat had left them and was being rowed back they all turned and looked round. They were surprised at how small the Dawn Treader looked.
Lucy was of course barefoot, having kicked off her shoes while swimming, but that is no hardship if one is going to walk on downy turf. It was delightful to be ashore again and to smell the earth and grass, even if at first the ground seemed to be pitching up and down like a ship, as it usually does for a while if one has been at sea. It was much warmer here than it had been on board and Lucy found the sand pleasant to her feet as they crossed it. There was a lark singing.
They struck inland and up a fairly steep, though low, hill. At the top of course they looked back, and there was the Dawn Treader shining like a great bright insect and crawling slowly north-westward with her oars. Then they went over the ridge and could see her no longer.
Doorn now lay before them, divided from Felimath by a channel about a mile wide; behind it and to the left lay Avra. The little white town of Narrowhaven on Doorn was easily seen.
"Hullo! What's this?" said Edmund suddenly.
In the green valley to which they were descending six or seven rough-looking men, all armed, were sitting by a tree.
"Don't tell them who we are," said Caspian.
"And pray, your Majesty, why not?" said Reepicheep who had consented to ride on Lucy's shoulder.
"It just occurred to me," replied Caspian, "that no one here can have heard from Narnia for a long time. It's just possible they may not still acknowledge our over-lordship. In which case it might not be quite safe to be known as the King."
"We have our swords, Sire," said Reepicheep.
"Yes, Reep, I know we have," said Caspian. "But if it is a question of re-conquering the three islands, I'd prefer to come back with a rather larger army."
By this time they were quite close to the strangers, one of whom—a big black-haired fellow—shouted out, "A good morning to you."
"And a good morning to you," said Caspian. "Is there still a Governor of the Lone Islands?"
"To be sure there is," said the man, "Governor Gumpas. His Sufficiency is at Narrowhaven. But you'll stay and drink with us."
Caspian thanked him, though neither he nor the others much liked the look of their new acquaintance, and all of them sat down. But hardly had they raised their cups to their lips when the black-haired man nodded to his companions and, as quick as lightning, all the five visitors found themselves wrapped in strong arms. There was a moment's struggle but all the advantages were on one side, and soon everyone was disarmed and had their hands tied behind their backs—except Reepicheep, writhing in his captor's grip and biting furiously.
"Careful with that beast, Tacks," said the Leader. "Don't damage him. He'll fetch the best price of the lot, I shouldn't wonder."
"Coward! Poltroon!" squeaked Reepicheep. "Give me my sword and free my paws if you dare."
"Whew!" whistled the slave merchant (for that is what he was). "It can talk! Well I never did. Blowed if I take less than two hundred crescents for him." The Calormen crescent, which is the chief coin in those parts, is worth about a third of a pound.
"So that's what you are," said Caspian. "A kidnapper and slaver. I hope you're proud of it."
"Now, now, now, now," said the slaver. "Don't you start any jaw. The easier you take it, the pleasanter all round, see? I don't do this for fun. I've got my living to make same as anyone else."
"Where will you take us?" asked Lucy, getting the words out with some difficulty.
"Over to Narrowhaven," said the slaver. "For market to-morrow."
"Is there a British Consul there?" asked Eustace.
"Is there a which?" said the man.
But long before Eustace was tired of trying to explain, the slaver simply said, "Well, I've had enough of this jabber. The Mouse is a fair treat but this one would talk the hind leg off a donkey. Off we go, mates."
Then the four human prisoners were roped together, not cruelly but securely, and made to march down to the shore. Reepicheep was carried. He had stopped biting on a threat of having his mouth tied up, but he had a great deal to say, and Lucy really wondered how any man could bear to have the things said to him which were said to the slave dealer by the Mouse. But the slave dealer, far from objecting, only said "Go on" whenever Reepicheep paused for breath, occasionally adding, "It's as good as a play", or, "Blimey, you can't help almost thinking it knows what it's saying!" or "Was it one of you what trained it?" This so infuriated Reepicheep that in the end the number of things he thought of saying all at once nearly suffocated him and he became silent.
When they got down to the shore that looked towards Doorn they found a little village and a long-boat on the beach and, lying a little further out, a dirty bedraggled looking ship.
"Now, youngsters," said the slave dealer, "let's have no fuss and then you'll have nothing to cry about. All aboard."
At that moment a fine-looking bearded man came out of one of the houses (an inn, I think) and said:
"Well, Pug. More of your usual wares?"
The slaver, whose name seemed to be Pug, bowed very low, and said in a wheedling kind of voice, "Yes, please your Lordship."
"How much do you want for that boy?" asked the other, pointing to Caspian.
"Ah," said Pug, "I knew your Lordship would pick on the best. No deceiving your Lordship with anything second rate. That boy, now, I've taken a fancy to him myself. Got kind of fond of him, I have. I'm that tender-hearted I didn't ever ought to have taken up this job. Still, to a customer like your Lordship——"
"Tell me your price, carrion," said the Lord sternly. "Do you think I want to listen to the rigmarole of your filthy trade?"
"Three hundred crescents, my Lord, to your honourable Lordship, but to anyone else——"
"I'll give you a hundred and fifty."
"Oh please, please," broke in Lucy. "Don't separate us, whatever you do. You don't know——" But then she stopped for she saw that Caspian didn't even now want to be known.
"A hundred and fifty, then," said the Lord. "As for you, little maiden, I am sorry I cannot buy you all. Unrope my boy, Pug. And look—treat these others well while they are in your hands or it'll be the worse for you."
"Well!" said Pug. "Now who ever heard of a gentleman in my way of business who treated his stock better than what I do? Well? Why, I treat 'em like my own children."
"That's likely enough to be true," said the other grimly.
The dreadful moment had now come. Caspian was untied and his new master said, "This way, lad," and Lucy burst into tears and Edmund looked very blank. But Caspian looked over his shoulder and said, "Cheer up. I'm sure it will come all right in the end. So long."
"Now, missie," said Pug. "Don't you start taking on and spoiling your looks for the market to-morrow. You be a good girl and then you won't have nothing to cry about, see?"
Then they were rowed out to the slave-ship and taken below into a long, rather dark place, none too clean, where they found many other unfortunate prisoners; for Pug was of course a pirate and had just returned from cruising among the islands and capturing what he could. The children didn't meet anyone whom they knew; the prisoners were mostly Galmians and Terebinthians. And there they sat in the straw and wondered what was happening to Caspian and tried to stop Eustace talking as if everyone except himself was to blame.
Meanwhile Caspian was having a much more interesting time. The man who had bought him led him down a little lane between two of the village houses and so out into an open place behind the village. Then he turned and faced him.
"You needn't be afraid of me, boy," he said. "I'll treat you well. I bought you for your face. You reminded me of someone."
"May I ask of whom, my Lord?" said Caspian.
"You remind me of my master, King Caspian of Narnia."
Then Caspian decided to risk everything on one stroke.
"My Lord," he said, "I am your master. I am Caspian, King of Narnia."
"You make very free," said the other. "How shall I know this is true?"
"Firstly by my face," said Caspian. "Secondly because I know within six guesses who you are. You are one of those seven lords of Narnia whom my Uncle Miraz sent to sea and whom I have come out to look for—Argoz, Bern, Octesian, Restimar, Mavramorn, or—or—I have forgotten the other. And finally, if your Lordship will give me a sword I will prove on any man's body in clean battle that I am Caspian the son of Caspian, lawful king of Narnia, Lord of Cair Paravel, and Emperor of the Lone Islands."
"By heaven," exclaimed the man, "it is his father's very voice and trick of speech. My liege—your majesty——" And there in the field he knelt and kissed the King's hand.
"The moneys your Lordship disbursed for our person will be made good from our own treasury," said Caspian.
"They're not in Pug's purse yet, Sire," said the Lord Bern, for he it was. "And never will be, I trust. I have moved his Sufficiency the Governor a hundred times to crush this vile traffic in man's flesh."
"My Lord Bern," said Caspian, "we must talk of the state of these Islands. But first what is your Lordship's own story?"
"Short enough, Sire," said Bern. "I came thus far with my six fellows, loved a girl of the islands, and felt I had had enough of the sea. And there was no purpose in returning to Narnia while your Majesty's uncle held the reins. So I married and have lived here ever since."
"And what is this governor, this Gumpas, like? Does he still acknowledge the King of Narnia for his lord?"
"In words, yes. All is done in the King's name. But he would not be best pleased to find a real, live King of Narnia coming in upon him. And if your Majesty came before him alone and unarmed—well he would not deny his allegiance, but he would pretend to disbelieve you. Your Grace's life would be in danger. What following has your Majesty in these waters?"
"There is my ship just rounding the point," said Caspian. "We are about thirty swords if it came to fighting. Shall we not have my ship in and fall upon Pug and free my friends whom he holds captive?"
"Not by my counsel," said Bern. "As soon as there was a fight two or three ships would put out from Narrowhaven to rescue Pug. Your Majesty must work by a show of more power than you really have, and by the terror of the King's name. It must not come to plain battle. Gumpas is a chicken-hearted man and can be over-awed."
After a little more conversation Caspian and Bern walked down to the coast a little west of the village and there Caspian winded his horn. (This was not the great magic horn of Narnia, Queen Susan's Horn: he had left that at home for his regent Trumpkin to use if any great need fell upon the land in the King's absence.) Drinian, who was on the look-out for a signal, recognised the royal horn at once and the Dawn Treader began standing in to shore. Then the boat put off again and in a few moments Caspian and the Lord Bern were on deck explaining the situation to Drinian. He, just like Caspian, wanted to lay the Dawn Treader alongside the slave-ship at once and board her, but Bern made the same objection.
"Steer straight down this channel, captain," said Bern, "and then round to Avra where my own estates are. But first run up the King's banner, hang out all the shields, and send as many men to the fighting top as you can. And about five bowshots hence, when you get open sea on your port bow, run up a few signals."
"Signals? To whom?" said Drinian.
"Why, to all the other ships we haven't got but which it might be well that Gumpas thinks we have."
"Oh, I see," said Drinian, rubbing his hands. "And they'll read our signals. What shall I say? Whole fleet found the South of Avra and assemble at——?"
"Bernstead," said the Lord Bern. "That'll do excellently. Their whole journey—if there were any ships—would be out of sight from Narrowhaven."
Caspian was sorry for the others languishing in the hold of Pug's slave ship, but he could not help finding the rest of that day enjoyable. Late in the afternoon (for they had to do all by oar), having turned to starboard round the north-east end of Doorn and port again round the point of Avra, they entered into a good harbour on Avra's southern shore where Bern's pleasant lands sloped down to the water's edge. Bern's people, many of whom they saw working in the fields, were all freemen and it was a happy and prosperous fief. Here they all went ashore and were royally feasted in a low, pillared house overlooking the bay. Bern and his gracious wife and merry daughters made them good cheer. But after dark Bern sent a messenger over by boat to Doorn to order some preparations (he did not say exactly what) for the following day.
Next morning the Lord Bern called his guests early and after breakfast he asked Caspian to order every man he had into full armour. "And above all," he added, "let everything be as trim and scoured as if it were the morning of the first battle in a great war between noble kings with all the world looking on." This was done; and then in three boat-loads, Caspian and his people, and Bern with a few of his, put out for Narrowhaven. The king's flag flew in the stern of his boat and his trumpeter was with him.
When they reached the jetty at Narrowhaven, Caspian found a considerable crowd assembled to meet them. "This is what I sent word about last night," said Bern. "They are all friends of mine and honest people." And as soon as Caspian stepped ashore the crowd broke out into hurrahs and shouts of, "Narnia! Narnia! Long live the king." At the same moment—and this was also due to Bern's messengers—bells began ringing from many parts of the town. Then Caspian caused his banner to be advanced and his trumpet to blow and every man drew his sword and set his face into a joyful sternness, and they marched up the street so that the street shook, and their armour shone (for it was a sunny morning) so that one could hardly look at it steadily.
At first the only people who cheered were those who had been warned by Bern's messenger and knew what was happening and wanted it to happen. But then all the children joined in because they liked a procession and had seen very few. And then all the schoolboys joined in because they also liked processions and felt that the more noise and disturbance there was the less likely they would be to have any school that morning. And then all the old women put their heads out of doors and windows and began chattering and cheering because it was a king, and what is a governor compared with that? And all the young women joined in for the same reason and also because Caspian and Drinian and the rest were so handsome. And then all the young men came to see what the young women were looking at, so that by the time Caspian reached the castle gates, nearly the whole town was shouting; and where Gumpas sat in the castle, muddling and messing about with accounts and forms and rules and regulations, he heard the noise.
At the castle gate Caspian's trumpeter blew a blast and cried, "Open for the king of Narnia, come to visit his trusty and well-beloved servant the governor of the Lone Islands." In those days everything in the islands was done in a slovenly, slouching manner. Only the little postern opened and out came a tousled fellow with a dirty old hat on his head instead of a helmet, and a rusty old pike in his hand. He blinked at the flashing figures before him. "Cam—seez—fishansy," he mumbled (which was his way of saying, "You can't see his Sufficiency"). "No interviews without 'pointments 'cept 'tween nine 'n' ten p.m. second Saturday every month."
"Uncover before Narnia, you dog," thundered the Lord Bern, and dealt him a rap with his gauntleted hand which sent his hat flying from his head.
"'Ere? Wot's it all about?" began the doorkeeper, but no one took any notice of him. Two of Caspian's men stepped through the postern and after some struggling with bars and bolts (for everything was rusty) flung both wings of the gate wide open. Then the king and his followers strode into the courtyard. Here a number of the governor's guards were lounging about and several more (they were mostly wiping their mouths) came tumbling out of various doorways. Though their armour was in a disgraceful condition, these were fellows who might have fought if they had been led or had known what was happening; so this was the dangerous moment. Caspian gave them no time to think.
"Where is the captain?" he asked.
"I am, more or less, if you know what I mean," said a languid and rather dandified young person without any armour at all.
"It is our wish," said Caspian, "that our royal visitation to our realm of the Lone Islands should, if possible, be an occasion of joy and not of terror to our loyal subjects. If it were not for that, I should have something to say about the state of your men's armour and weapons. As it is, you are pardoned. Command a cask of wine to be opened that your men may drink our health. But at noon to-morrow I wish to see them here in this courtyard looking like men at arms and not like vagabonds. See to it on pain of our extreme displeasure."
The captain gaped but Bern immediately cried, "Three cheers for the king", and the soldiers, who had understood about the cask of wine even if they understood nothing else, joined in. Caspian then ordered most of his own men to remain in the courtyard. He, with Bern and Drinian and four others, went into the hall.
Behind a table at the far end with various secretaries about him sat his Sufficiency, the governor of the Lone Islands. Gumpas was a bilious looking man with hair that had once been red and was now mostly grey. He glanced up as the strangers entered and then looked down at his papers saying automatically, "No interviews without appointments except between nine and ten p.m. on second Saturdays."
Caspian nodded to Bern and then stood aside. Bern and Drinian took a step forward and each seized one end of the table. They lifted it, and flung it on one side of the hall where it rolled over, scattering a cascade of letters, dossiers, ink-pots, pens, sealing-wax and documents. Then, not roughly but as firmly as if their hands were pincers of steel, they plucked Gumpas out of his chair and deposited him, facing it, about four feet away. Caspian at once sat down in the chair and laid his naked sword across his knees.
"My Lord," said he, fixing his eyes on Gumpas, "you have not given us quite the welcome we expected. We are the King of Narnia."
"Nothing about it in the correspondence," said the governor. "Nothing in the minutes. We have not been notified of any such thing. All irregular. Happy to consider any applications——"
"And we are come to inquire into your Sufficiency's conduct of your office," continued Caspian. "There are two points especially on which I require an explanation. Firstly I find no record that the tribute due from these Islands to the crown of Narnia has been received for about a hundred and fifty years."
"That would be a question to raise at the Council next month," said Gumpas. "If anyone moves that a commission of inquiry be set up to report on the financial history of the islands at the first meeting next year, why then..."
"I also find it very clearly written in our laws," Caspian went on, "that if the tribute is not delivered the whole debt has to be paid by the governor of the Lone Islands out of his private purse."
At this Gumpas began to pay real attention. "Oh, that's quite out of the question," he said. "It is an economic impossibility—er—your Majesty must be joking."
Inside, he was wondering if there were any way of getting rid of these unwelcome visitors. Had he known that Caspian had only one ship and one ship's company with him, he would have spoken soft words for the moment, and hoped to have them all surrounded and killed during the night. But he had seen a ship of war sail down the straits yesterday and seen it signalling, as he supposed, to its consorts. He had not then known it was the king's ship for there was not wind enough to spread the flag out and make the golden lion visible, so he had waited further developments. Now he imagined that Caspian had a whole fleet at Bernstead. It would never have occurred to Gumpas that anyone would walk into Narrowhaven to take the islands with less than fifty men; it was certainly not at all the kind of thing he could imagine doing himself.
"Secondly," said Caspian, "I want to know why you have permitted this abominable and unnatural traffic in slaves to grow up here, contrary to the ancient custom and usage of our dominions."
"Necessary, unavoidable," said his Sufficiency. "An essential part of the economic development of the islands, I assure you. Our present burst of prosperity depends on it."
"What need have you of slaves?"
"For export, your Majesty. Sell 'em to Calormen mostly; and we have other markets. We are a great centre of the trade."
"In other words," said Caspian, "you don't need them. Tell me what purpose they serve except to put money into the pockets of such as Pug?"
"Your Majesty's tender years," said Gumpas, with what was meant to be a fatherly smile, "hardly make it possible that you should understand the economic problem involved. I have statistics, I have graphs, I have——"
"Tender as my years may be," said Caspian, "I believe I understand the slave trade from within quite as well as your Sufficiency. And I do not see that it brings into the islands meat or bread or beer or wine or timber or cabbages or books or instruments of music or horses or armour or anything else worth having. But whether it does or not, it must be stopped."
"But that would be putting the clock back," gasped the governor. "Have you no idea of progress, of development?"
"I have seen them both in an egg," said Caspian. "We call it Going Bad in Narnia. This trade must stop."
"I can take no responsibility for any such measure," said Gumpas.
"Very well, then," answered Caspian, "we relieve you of your office. My Lord Bern, come here." And before Gumpas quite realised what was happening, Bern was kneeling with his hands between the King's hands and taking the oath to govern the Lone Islands in accordance with the old customs, rights, usages and laws of Narnia. And Caspian said, "I think we have had enough of governors," and made Bern a Duke, the Duke of the Lone Islands.
"As for you, my Lord," he said to Gumpas, "I forgive you your debt for the tribute. But before noon to-morrow you and yours must be out of the castle, which is now the Duke's residence."
"Look here, this is all very well," said one of Gumpas's secretaries, "but suppose all you gentlemen stop play-acting and we do a little business. The question before us really is——"
"The question is," said the Duke, "whether you and the rest of the rabble will leave without a flogging or with one. You may choose which you prefer."
When all this had been pleasantly settled, Caspian ordered horses, of which there were a few in the castle, though very ill groomed, and he with Bern and Drinian and a few others rode out into the town and made for the slave market. It was a long low building near the harbour and the scene which they found going on inside was very much like any other auction; that is to say, there was a great crowd and Pug, on a platform, was roaring out in a raucous voice:
"Now, gentlemen, lot twenty-three. Fine Terebinthian agricultural labourer, suitable for the mines or the galleys. Under twenty-five years of age. Not a bad tooth in his head. Good, brawny fellow. Take off his shirt, Tacks, and let the gentlemen see. There's muscle for you! Look at the chest on him. Ten crescents from the gentleman in the corner. You must be joking, sir. Fifteen! Eighteen! Eighteen is bidden for lot twenty-three. Any advance on eighteen? Twenty-one. Thank you, sir. Twenty-one is bidden——"
But Pug stopped and gaped when he saw the mail-clad figures who had clanked up to the platform.
"On your knees, every man of you, to the King of Narnia," said the Duke. Everyone heard the horses jingling and stamping outside and many had heard some rumour of the landing and the events at the castle. Most obeyed. Those who did not were pulled down by their neighbours. Some cheered.
"Your life is forfeit, Pug, for laying hands on our royal person yesterday," said Caspian. "But your ignorance is pardoned. The slave trade was forbidden in all our dominions quarter of an hour ago. I declare every slave in this market free."
He held up his hand to check the cheering of the slaves and went on, "Where are my friends?"
"That dear little gel and the nice young gentleman?" said Pug with an ingratiating smile. "Why, they were snapped up at once——"
"We're here, we're here, Caspian," cried Lucy and Edmond together and, "At your service, Sire," piped Reepicheep from another corner. They had all been sold but the men who had bought them were staying to bid for other slaves and so they had not been taken away yet. The crowd parted to let the three of them out and there was great hand-clasping and greeting between them and Caspian. Two merchants of Calormen at once approached. The Calormenes have dark faces and long beards. They wear flowing robes and orange-coloured turbans, and they are a wise, wealthy, courteous, cruel and ancient people. They bowed most politely to Caspian and paid him long compliments, all about the fountains of prosperity irrigating the gardens of prudence and virtue—and things like that—but of course what they wanted was the money they had paid.
"That is only fair, sirs," said Caspian. "Every man who has bought a slave to-day must have his money back. Pug, bring out your takings to the last minim." (A minim is the fortieth part of a crescent.)
"Does your good Majesty mean to beggar me?" whined Pug.
"You have lived on broken hearts all your life," said Caspian, "and if you are beggared, it is better to be a beggar than a slave. But where is my other friend?"
"Oh him?" said Pug. "Oh take him and welcome. Glad to have him off my hands. I never see such a drug in the market in all my born days. Priced him at five crescents in the end and even so nobody'd have him. Threw him in free with other lots and still no one would have him. Wouldn't touch him. Wouldn't look at him. Tacks, bring out Sulky."
Thus Eustace was produced, and sulky he certainly looked; for though no one would want to be sold as a slave, it is perhaps even more galling to be a sort of utility slave whom no one will buy. He walked up to Caspian and said, "I see. As usual. Been enjoying yourself somewhere while the rest of us were prisoners. I suppose you haven't even found out about the British Consul. Of course not."
That night they had a great feast in the castle of Narrowhaven and then, "To-morrow for the beginning of our real adventures!" said Reepicheep when he had made his bows to everyone and went to bed. But it could not really be to-morrow or anything like it. For now they were preparing to leave all known lands and seas behind them and the fullest preparations had to be made. The Dawn Treader was emptied and drawn on land by eight horses over rollers and every bit of her was gone over by the most skilled shipwrights. Then she was launched again and victualled and watered as full as she could hold—that is to say for twenty-eight days. Even this, as Edmond noticed with disappointment, only gave them a fortnight's eastward sailing before they had to abandon their quest.
While all this was being done Caspian missed no chance of questioning all the oldest sea captains whom he could find in Narrowhaven to learn if they had any knowledge or even any rumours of land further to the east. He poured out many a flagon of the castle ale to weather-beaten men with short grey beards and clear blue eyes, and many a tall yarn he heard in return. But those who seemed the most truthful could tell of no lands beyond the Lone Islands, and many thought that if you sailed too far east you would come into the surges of a sea without lands that swirled perpetually round the rim of the world—"And that, I reckon, is where your Majesty's friends went to the bottom." The rest had only wild stories of islands inhabited by headless men, floating islands, waterspouts, and a fire that burned along the water. Only one, to Reepicheep's delight, said, "And beyond that, Aslan's country. But that's beyond the end of the world and you can't get there." But when they questioned him he could only say that he'd heard it from his father.
Bern could only tell them that he had seen his six companions sail away eastward and that nothing had ever been heard of them again. He said this when he and Caspian were standing on the highest point of Avra looking down on the eastern ocean. "I've often been up here of a morning," said the Duke, "and seen the sun come up out of the sea, and sometimes it looked as if it were only a couple of miles away. And I've wondered about my friends and wondered what there really is behind that horizon. Nothing, most likely, yet I am always half ashamed that I stayed behind. But I wish your Majesty wouldn't go. We may need your help here. This closing the slave market might make a new world; war with Calormen is what I foresee. My liege, think again."
"I have an oath, my lord Duke," said Caspian. "And anyway, what could I say to Reepicheep?"
It was nearly three weeks after their landing that the Dawn Treader was towed out of Narrowhaven harbour. Very solemn farewells had been spoken and a great crowd had assembled to see her departure. There had been cheers, and tears too, when Caspian made his last speech to the Lone Islanders and parted from the Duke and his family, but as the ship, her purple sail still flapping idly, drew farther from the shore, and the sound of Caspian's trumpet from the poop came fainter across the water, everyone became silent. Then she came into the wind. The sail swelled out, the tug cast off and began rowing back, the first real wave ran up under the Dawn Treader's prow, and she was a live ship again. The men off duty went below, Drinian took the first watch on the poop, and she turned her head eastward round the south of Avra.
The next few days were delightful. Lucy thought she was the most fortunate girl in the world, as she woke each morning to see the reflections of the sunlit water dancing on the ceiling of her cabin and looked round on all the nice new things she had got in the Lone Island—sea-boots and buskins and cloaks and jerkins and scarves. And then she would go on deck and take a look from the forecastle at a sea which was a brighter blue each morning and drink in an air that was a little warmer day by day. After that came breakfast and such an appetite as one only has at sea.
She spent a good deal of time sitting on the little bench in the stern playing chess with Reepicheep. It was amusing to see him lifting the pieces, which were far too big for him, with both paws and standing on tiptoes if he made a move near the centre of the board. He was a good player and when he remembered what he was doing he usually won. But every now and then Lucy won because the Mouse did something quite ridiculous like sending a knight into the danger of a queen and castle combined. This happened because he had momentarily forgotten it was a game of chess and was thinking of a real battle and making the knight do what he would certainly have done in its place. For his mind was full of forlorn hopes, death or glory charges, and last stands.
But this pleasant time did not last. There came an evening when Lucy, gazing idly astern at the long furrow or wake they were leaving behind them, saw a great rack of clouds building itself up in the west with amazing speed. Then a gap was torn in it and a yellow sunset poured through the gap. All the waves behind them seemed to take on unusual shapes and the sea was a drab or yellowish colour like dirty canvas. The air grew cold. The ship seemed to move uneasily as if she felt danger behind her. The sail would be flat and limp one minute and wildly full the next. While she was noticing these things and wondering at a sinister change which had come over the very noise of the wind, Drinian cried, "All hands on deck." In a moment everyone became frantically busy. The hatches were battened down, the galley fire was put out, men went aloft to reef the sail. Before they had finished the storm struck them. It seemed to Lucy that a great valley in the sea opened just before their bows, and they rushed down into it, deeper down than she would have believed possible. A great grey hill of water, far higher than the mast, rushed to meet them; it looked certain death but they were tossed to the top of it. Then the ship seemed to spin round. A cataract of water poured over the deck; the poop and forecastle were like two islands with a fierce sea between them. Up aloft the sailors were lying out along the yard desperately trying to get control of the sail. A broken rope stood out sideways in the wind as straight and stiff as if it was a poker.
"Get below, Ma'am," bawled Drinian. And Lucy, knowing that landsmen—and landswomen—are a nuisance to the crew, began to obey. It was not easy. The Dawn Treader was listing terribly to starboard and the deck sloped like the roof of a house. She had to clamber round to the top of the ladder, holding on to the rail, and then stand by while two men climbed up it, and then get down it as best she could. It was well she was already holding on tight for at the foot of the ladder another wave roared across the deck, up to her shoulders. She was already almost wet through with spray and rain but this was colder. Then she made a dash for the cabin door and got in and shut out for a moment the appalling sight of the speed with which they were rushing into the dark, but not of course the horrible confusion of creakings, groanings, snappings, clatterings, roarings and boomings which only sounded more alarming below than they had done on the poop.
And all next day and all the next it went on. It went on till one could hardly even remember a time before it had begun. And there always had to be three men at the tiller and it was as much as three could do to keep any kind of a course. And there always had to be men at the pump. And there was hardly any rest for anyone, and nothing could be cooked and nothing could be dried, and one man was lost overboard, and they never saw the sun.
When it was over Eustace made the following entry in his diary.
"September 3. The first day for ages when I have been able to write. We had been driven before a hurricane for thirteen days and nights. I know that because I kept a careful count, though the others all say it was only twelve. Pleasant to be embarked on a dangerous voyage with people who can't even count right! I have had a ghastly time, up and down enormous waves hour after hour, usually wet to the skin, and not even an attempt at giving us proper meals. Needless to say there's no wireless or even a rocket, so no chance of signalling anyone for help. It all proves what I keep on telling them, the madness of setting out in a rotten little tub like this. It would be bad enough even if one was with decent people instead of fiends in human form. Caspian and Edmund are simply brutal to me. The night we lost our mast (there's only a stump left now), though I was not at all well they forced me to come on deck and work like a slave. Lucy shoved her oar in by saying that Reepicheep was longing to go only he was too small. I wonder she doesn't see that everything that little beast does is all for the sake of showing off. Even at her age she ought to have that amount of sense. To-day the beastly boat is level at last and the sun's out and we have all been jawing about what to do. We have food enough, pretty beastly stuff most of it, to last for sixteen days. (The poultry were all washed overboard. Even if they hadn't been, the storm would have stopped them laying.) The real trouble is water. Two casks seem to have got a leak knocked in them and are empty (Narnian efficiency again). On short rations, half a pint a day each, we've got enough for twelve days. (There's still lots of rum and wine but even they realise that would only make them thirstier.)
"If we could, of course, the sensible thing would be to turn west at once and make for Lone Islands. But it took us eighteen days to get where we are, running like mad with a gale behind us. Even if we got an east wind it might take us far longer to get back. And at present there's no sign of an east wind—in fact there's no wind at all. As for rowing back, it would take far too long and Caspian says the men couldn't row on half a pint of water a day. I'm pretty sure this is wrong. I tried to explain that perspiration really cools people down, so the men would need less water if they were working. He didn't take any notice of this, which is always his way when he can't think of an answer. The others all voted for going on in the hope of finding land. I felt it my duty to point out that we didn't know there was any land ahead and tried to get them to see the dangers of wishful thinking. Instead of producing a better plan they had the cheek to ask me what I proposed. So I just explained coolly and quietly that I had been kidnapped and brought away on this idiotic voyage without my consent, and it was hardly my business to get them out of their scrape.
"September 4. Still becalmed. Very short rations for dinner and I got less than anyone. Caspian is very clever at helping and thinks I don't see! Lucy for some reason tried to make up to me by offering me some of hers but that interfering prig Edmund wouldn't let her. Pretty hot sun. Terribly thirsty all evening.
"September 5. Still becalmed and very hot. Feeling rotten all day and am sure I've got a temperature. Of course they haven't the sense to keep a thermometer on board.
"September 6. A horrible day. Woke up in the night knowing I was feverish and must have a drink of water. Any doctor would have said so. Heaven knows I'm the last person to try to get any unfair advantage but I never dreamed that this water-rationing would be meant to apply to a sick man. In fact I would have woken the others up and asked for some only I thought it would be selfish to wake them. So I just got up and took my cup and tiptoed out of the Black Hole we sleep in, taking great care not to disturb Caspian and Edmund, for they've been sleeping badly since the heat and the short water began. I always try to consider others whether they are nice to me or not. I got out all right into the big room, if you can call it a room, where the rowing benches and the luggage are. The thing of water is at this end. All was going beautifully, but before I'd drawn a cupful who should catch me but that little spy Reep. I tried to explain that I was going on deck for a breath of air (the business about the water had nothing to do with him) and he asked me why I had a cup. He made such a noise that the whole ship was roused. They treated me scandalously. I asked, as I think anyone would have, why Reepicheep was sneaking about the water cask in the middle of the night. He said that as he was too small to be any use on deck, he did sentry over the water every night so that one more man could go to sleep. Now comes their rotten unfairness: they all believed him. Can you beat it?
"I had to apologise or the dangerous little brute would have been at me with his sword. And then Caspian showed up in his true colours as a brutal tyrant and said out loud for everyone to hear that anyone found 'stealing' water in future would 'get two dozen'. I didn't I know what this meant till Edmund explained to me. It comes in the sort of books those Pevensie kids read.
"After this cowardly threat Caspian changed his tune and started being patronising. Said he was sorry for me and that everyone felt just as feverish as I did and we must all make the best of it, etc., etc. Odious stuck-up prig. Stayed in bed all day to-day.
"September 7. A little wind to-day but still from the west. Made a few miles eastward with part of the sail, set on what Drinian calls the jury-mast—that means the bowsprit set upright and tied (they call it 'lashed') to the stump of the real mast. Still terribly thirsty.
"September 8. Still sailing east. I stay in my bunk all day now and see no one except Lucy till the two fiends come to bed. Lucy gives me a little of her water ration. She says girls don't get as thirsty as boys. I had often thought this but it ought to be more generally known at sea.
"September 9. Land in sight; a very high mountain a long way off to the south-east.
"September 10. The mountain is bigger and clearer but still a long way off. Gulls again to-day for the first time since I don't know how long.
"September 11. Caught some fish and had them for dinner. Dropped anchor at about 7 p.m. in three fathoms of water in a bay of this mountainous island. That idiot Caspian wouldn't let us go ashore because it was getting dark and he was afraid of savages and wild beasts. Extra water ration to-night."
What awaited them on this island was going to concern Eustace more than anyone else, but it cannot be told in his words because after September 11 he forgot about keeping his diary for a long time.
When morning came, with a low, grey sky but very hot, the adventurers found they were in a bay encircled by such cliffs and crags that it was like a Norwegian fjord. In front of them, at the head of the bay there was some level land heavily overgrown with trees that appeared to be cedars, through which a rapid stream came out. Beyond that was a steep ascent ending in a jagged ridge and behind that a vague darkness of mountains which ran up into dull coloured clouds so that you could not see their tops. The nearer cliffs, at each side of the bay, were streaked here and there with lines of white which everyone knew to be waterfalls, though at that distance they did not show any movement or make any noise. Indeed the whole place was very silent and the water of the bay as smooth as glass. It reflected every detail of the cliffs. The scene would have been pretty in a picture but was rather oppressive in real life. It was not a country that welcomed visitors.
The whole ship's company went ashore in two boatloads and everyone drank and washed deliciously in the river and had a meal and a rest before Caspian sent four men back to keep the ship, and the day's work began. There was everything to be done. The casks must be brought ashore and the faulty ones mended if possible and all refilled; a tree—a pine if they could get it—must be felled and made into a new mast; sails must be repaired; a hunting party organised to shoot any game the land might yield; clothes to be washed and mended; and countless small breakages on board to be set right. For the Dawn Treader herself—and this was more obvious now that they saw her at a distance—could hardly be recognised as the same gallant ship which had left Narrowhaven. She looked a crippled, discoloured hulk which anyone might have taken for a wreck. And her officers and crew were no better—lean, pale, red-eyed from lack of sleep, and dressed in rags.
As Eustace lay under a tree and heard all these plans being discussed his heart sank. Was there going to be no rest? It looked as if their first day on the longed-for land was going to be quite as hard work as a day at sea. Then a delightful idea occurred to him. Nobody was looking—they were all chattering about their ship as if they actually liked the beastly thing. Why shouldn't he simply slip away? He would take a stroll inland, find a cool, airy place up in the mountains, have a good long sleep, and not rejoin the others till the day's work was over. He felt it would do him good. But he would take great care to keep the bay and the ship in sight so as to be sure of his way back. He wouldn't like to be left behind in this country.
He at once put his plan into action. He rose quietly from his place and walked away among the trees, taking care to go slowly and in an aimless manner so that anyone who saw him would think he was merely stretching his legs. He was surprised to find how quickly the noise of conversation died away behind him and how very silent and warm and dark green the wood became. Soon he felt he could venture on a quicker and more determined stride.
This soon brought him out of the wood. The ground began sloping steeply up in front of him. The grass was dry and slippery but manageable if he used his hands as well as his feet, and though he panted and mopped his forehead a good deal, he plugged away steadily. This showed, by the way, that his new life, little as he suspected it, had already done him some good; the old Eustace, Harold's and Alberta's Eustace, would have given up the climb after about ten minutes.
Slowly, and with several rests, he reached the ridge. Here he had expected to have a view into the heart of the island, but the clouds had now come lower and nearer and a sea of fog was rolling to meet him. He sat down and looked back. He was now so high that the bay looked small beneath him and miles of sea were visible. Then the fog from the mountains closed in all round him, thick but not cold, and he lay down and turned this way and that to find the most comfortable position to enjoy himself.
But he didn't enjoy himself, or not for very long. He began, almost for the first time in his life, to feel lonely. At first this feeling grew very gradually. And then he began to worry about the time. There was not the slightest sound. Suddenly it occurred to him that he might have been lying there for hours. Perhaps the others had gone! Perhaps they had let him wander away on purpose simply in order to leave him behind! He leaped up in a panic and began the descent.
At first he tried to do it too quickly, slipped on the steep grass, and slid for several feet. Then he thought this had carried him too far to the left—and as he came up he had seen precipices on that side. So he clambered up again, as near as he could guess to the place he had started from, and began the descent afresh, bearing to his right. After that things seemed to be going better. He went very cautiously, for he could not see more than a yard ahead, and there was still perfect silence all around him. It is very unpleasant to have to go cautiously when there is a voice inside you saying all the time, "Hurry, hurry, hurry." For every moment the terrible idea of being left behind grew stronger. If he had understood Caspian and the Pevensies at all he would have known, of course, that there was not the least chance of their doing any such thing. But he had persuaded himself that they were all fiends in human form.
"At last!" said Eustace as he came slithering down a slide of loose stones (scree, they call it) and found himself on the level. "And now, where are those trees? There is something dark ahead. Why, I do believe the fog is clearing."
It was. The light increased every moment and made him blink. The fog lifted. He was in an utterly unknown valley and the sea was nowhere in sight.
At that very moment the others were washing hands and faces in the river and generally getting ready for dinner and a rest. The three best archers had gone up into the hills north of the bay and returned laden with a pair of wild goats which were now roasting over a fire. Caspian had ordered a cask of wine ashore, strong wine of Archenland which had to be mixed with water before you drank it, so there would be plenty for all. The work had gone well so far and it was a merry meal. Only after the second helping of goat did Edmund say, "Where's that blighter Eustace?"
Meanwhile Eustace stared round the unknown valley. It was so narrow and deep, and the precipices which surrounded it so sheer, that it was like a huge pit or trench. The floor was grassy though strewn with rocks, and here and there Eustace saw black burnt patches like those you see on the sides of a railway embankment in a dry summer. About fifteen yards away from him was a pool of clear, smooth water. There was, at first, nothing else at all in the valley; not an animal, not a bird, not an insect. The sun beat down and grim peaks and horns of mountains peered over the valley's edge.
Eustace realised of course that in the fog he had come down the wrong side of the ridge, so he turned at once to see about getting back. But as soon as he had looked he shuddered. Apparently he had by amazing luck found the only possible way down—a long green spit of land, horribly steep and narrow, with precipices on either side. There was no other possible way of getting back. But could he do it, now that he saw what it was really like? His head swam at the very thought of it.
He turned round again, thinking that at any rate he'd better have a good drink from the pool first. But as soon as he had turned and before he had taken a step forward into the valley he heard a noise behind him. It was only a small noise but it sounded loud in that immense silence. It froze him dead still where he stood for a second. Then he slewed round his head and looked.
At the bottom of the cliff a little on his left hand was a low, dark hole—the entrance to a cave perhaps. And out of this two thin wisps of smoke were coming. And the loose stones just beneath the dark hollow were moving (that was the noise he had heard) just as if something were crawling in the dark behind them.
Something was crawling. Worse still, something was coming out. Edmund or Lucy or you would have recognised it at once, but Eustace had read none of the right books. The thing that came out of the cave was something he had never even imagined—a long lead-coloured snout, dull red eyes, no feathers or fur, a long lithe body that trailed on the ground, legs whose elbows went up higher than its back like a spider's, cruel claws, bat's wings that made a rasping noise on the stones, yards of tail. And the two lines of smoke were coming from its two nostrils. He never said the word Dragon to himself. Nor would it have made things any better if he had.
But perhaps if he had known something about dragons he would have been a little surprised at this dragon's behaviour. It did not sit up and clap its wings, nor did it shoot out a stream of flame from its mouth. The smoke from its nostrils was like the smoke of a fire that will not last much longer. Nor did it seem to have noticed Eustace. It moved very slowly towards the pool—slowly and with many pauses. Even in his fear Eustace felt that it was an old, sad creature. He wondered if he dared make a dash for the ascent. But it might look round if he made any noise. It might come more to life. Perhaps it was only shamming. Anyway, what was the use of trying to escape by climbing from a creature that could fly?
It reached the pool and slid its horrible scaly chin down over the gravel to drink: but before it had drunk there came from it a great croaking or clanging cry and after a few twitches and convulsions it rolled round on its side and lay perfectly still with one claw in the air. A little dark blood gushed from its wide-opened mouth. The smoke from its nostrils turned black for a moment and then floated away. No more came.
For a long time Eustace did not dare to move. Perhaps this was the brute's trick, the way it lured travellers to their doom. But one couldn't wait for ever. He took a step nearer, then two steps, and halted again. The dragon remained motionless; he noticed too that the red fire had gone out of its eyes. At last he came up to it. He was quite sure now that it was dead. With a shudder he touched it; nothing happened.
The relief was so great that Eustace almost laughed out loud. He began to feel as if he had fought and killed the dragon instead of merely seeing it die. He stepped over it and went to the pool for his drink, for the heat was getting unbearable. He was not surprised when he heard a peal of thunder. Almost immediately afterwards the sun disappeared and before he had finished his drink big drops of rain were falling.
The climate of this island was a very unpleasant one. In less than a minute Eustace was wet to the skin and half blinded with such rain as one never sees in Europe. There was no use trying to climb out of the valley as long as this lasted. He bolted for the only shelter in sight—the dragon's cave. There he lay down and tried to get his breath.
Most of us know what we should expect to find in a dragon's lair, but, as I said before, Eustace had read only the wrong books. They had a lot to say about exports and imports and governments and drains, but they were weak on dragons. That is why he was so puzzled at the surface on which he was lying. Parts of it were too prickly to be stones and too hard to be thorns, and there seemed to be a great many round, flat things, and it all clinked when he moved. There was light enough at the cave's mouth to examine it by. And of course Eustace found it to be what any of us could have told him in advance—treasure. There were crowns (those were the prickly things), coins, rings, bracelets, ingots, cups, plates and gems.
Eustace (unlike most boys) had never thought much of treasure but he saw at once the use it would be in this new world which he had so foolishly stumbled into through the picture in Lucy's bedroom at home. "They don't have any tax here," he said. "And you don't have to give treasure to the government. With some of this stuff I could have quite a decent time here—perhaps in Calormen. It sounds the least phoney of these countries. I wonder how much I can carry? That bracelet now—those things in it are probably diamonds—I'll slip that on my own wrist. Too big, but not if I push it right up here above my elbow. Then fill my pockets with diamonds—that's easier than gold. I wonder when this infernal rain's going to let up?" He got into a less uncomfortable part of the pile, where it was mostly coins, and settled down to wait. But a bad fright, when once it is over, and especially a bad fright following a mountain walk, leaves you very tired. Eustace fell asleep.
By the time he was sound asleep and snoring the others had finished dinner and become seriously alarmed about him. They shouted, "Eustace! Eustace! Coo-ee!" till they were hoarse and Caspian blew his horn.
"He's nowhere near or he'd have heard that," said Lucy with a white face.
"Confound the fellow," said Edmund. "What on earth did he want to slink away like this for?"
"But we must do something," said Lucy. "He may have got lost, or fallen into a hole, or been captured by savages."
"Or killed by wild beasts," said Drinian.
"And a good riddance if he has, I say," muttered Rhince.
"Master Rhince," said Reepicheep, "you never spoke a word that became you less. The creature is no friend of mine but he is of the Queen's blood, and while he is one of our fellowship it concerns our honour to find him and to avenge him if he is dead."
"Of course we've got to find him (if we can)" said Caspian wearily. "That's the nuisance of it. It means a search party and endless trouble. Bother Eustace."
Meanwhile Eustace slept and slept—and slept. What woke him was a pain in his arm. The moon was shining in at the mouth of the cave, and the bed of treasures seemed to have grown much more comfortable: in fact he could hardly feel it at all. He was puzzled by the pain in his arm at first, but presently it occurred to him that the bracelet which he had shoved up above his elbow had become strangely tight. His arm must have swollen while he was asleep (it was his left arm).
He moved his right arm in order to feel his left, but stopped before he had moved it an inch and bit his lip in terror. For just in front of him, and a little on his right, where the moonlight fell clear on the floor of the cave, he saw a hideous shape moving. He knew that shape: it was a dragon's claw. It had moved as he moved his hand and became still when he stopped moving his hand.
"Oh, what a fool I've been," thought Eustace. "Of course, the brute had a mate and it's lying beside me."
For several minutes he did not dare to move a muscle. He saw two thin columns of smoke going up before his eyes, black against the moonlight; just as there had been smoke coming from the other dragon's nose before it died. This was so alarming that he held his breath. The two columns of smoke vanished. When he could hold his breath no longer he let it out stealthily; instantly two jets of smoke appeared again. But even yet he had no idea of the truth.
Presently he decided that he would edge very cautiously to his left and try to creep out of the cave. Perhaps the creature was asleep—and anyway it was his only chance. But of course before he edged to the left he looked to the left. Oh horror! there was a dragon's claw on that side too.
No one will blame Eustace if at this moment he shed tears. He was surprised at the size of his own tears as he saw them splashing on to the treasure in front of him. They also seemed strangely hot; steam went up from them.
But there was no good crying. He must try to crawl out from between the two dragons. He began extending his right arm. The dragon's fore-leg and claw on his right went through exactly the same motion. Then he thought he would try his left. The dragon limb on that side moved too.
Two dragons, one on each side, mimicking whatever he did! His nerve broke and he simply made a bolt for it.
There was such a clatter and rasping, and clinking of gold, and grinding of stones, as he rushed out of the cave that he thought they were both following him. He daren't look back. He rushed to the pool. The twisted shape of the dead dragon lying in the moonlight would have been enough to frighten anyone but now he hardly noticed it. His idea was to get into the water.
But just as he reached the edge of the pool two things happened. First of all it came over him like a thunder-clap that he had been running on all fours—and why on earth had he been doing that? And secondly, as he bent towards the water, he thought for a second that yet another dragon was staring up at him out of the pool. But in an instant he realised the truth. That dragon face in the pool was his own reflection. There was no doubt of it. It moved as he moved: it opened and shut its mouth as he opened and shut his.
He had turned into a dragon while he was asleep. Sleeping on a dragon's hoard with greedy, dragonish thoughts in his heart, he had become a dragon himself.
That explained everything. There had been no two dragons beside him in the cave. The claws to right and left had been his own right and left claws. The two columns of smoke had been coming from his own nostrils. As for the pain in his left arm (or what had been his left arm) he could now see what had happened by squinting with his left eye. The bracelet which had fitted very nicely on the upper arm of a boy was far too small for the thick, stumpy foreleg of a dragon. It had sunk deeply into his scaly flesh and there was a throbbing bulge on each side of it. He tore at the place with his dragon's teeth but could not get it off.
In spite of the pain, his first feeling was one of relief. There was nothing to be afraid of any more. He was a terror himself now and nothing in the world but a knight (and not all of those) would dare to attack him. He could get even with Caspian and Edmund now——
But the moment he thought this he realised that he didn't want to. He wanted to be friends. He wanted to get back among humans and talk and laugh and share things. He realised that he was a monster cut off from the whole human race. An appalling loneliness came over him. He began to see that the others had not really been fiends at all. He began to wonder if he himself had been such a nice person as he had always supposed. He longed for their voices. He would have been grateful for a kind word even from Reepicheep.
When he thought of this the poor dragon that had been Eustace lifted up its voice and wept. A powerful dragon crying its eyes out under the moon in a deserted valley is a sight and a sound hardly to be imagined.
At last he decided he would try to find his way back to the shore. He realised now that Caspian would never have sailed away and left him. And he felt sure that somehow or other he would be able to make people understand who he was.
He took a long drink and then (I know this sounds shocking, but it isn't if you think it over) he ate nearly all the dead dragon. He was half-way through it before he realised what he was doing; for, you see, though his mind was the mind of Eustace, his tastes and his digestion were dragonish. And there is nothing a dragon likes so well as fresh dragon. That is why you so seldom find more than one dragon in the same county.
Then he turned to climb out of the valley. He began the climb with a jump and as soon as he jumped he found that he was flying. He had quite forgotten about his wings and it was a great surprise to him—the first pleasant surprise he had had for a long time. He rose high into the air and saw innumerable mountain-tops spread out beneath him in the moonlight. He could see the bay like a silver slab and the Dawn Treader lying at anchor and camp fires twinkling in the woods beside the beach. From a great height he launched himself down towards them in a single glide.
Lucy was sleeping very sound for she had sat up till the return of the search party in hope of good news about Eustace. It had been led by Caspian and had come back late and weary. Their news was disquieting. They had found no trace of Eustace but had seen a dead dragon in a valley. They tried to make the best of it and everyone assured everyone else that there were not likely to be more dragons about, and that one which was dead at about three o'clock that afternoon (which was when they had seen it) would hardly have been killing people a very few hours before.
"Unless it ate the little brat and died of him: he'd poison anything," said Rhince. But he said this under his breath and no one heard it.
But later in the night Lucy was waked, very softly, and found the whole company gathered close together and talking in whispers.
"What is it?" said Lucy.
"We must all show great constancy," Caspian was saying. "A dragon has just flown over the tree-tops and lighted on the beach. Yes, I am afraid it is between us and the ship. And arrows are no use against dragons. And they're not at all afraid of fire."
"With your Majesty's leave——" began Reepicheep.
"No, Reepicheep," said the King very firmly, "you are not going to attempt a single combat with it. And unless you promise to obey me in this matter I'll have you tied up. We must just keep close watch and, as soon as it is light, go down to the beach and give it battle. I will lead. King Edmund will be on my right and the Lord Drinian on my left. There are no other arrangements to be made. It will be light in a couple of hours. In an hour's time let a meal be served out and what is left of the wine. And let everything be done silently."
"Perhaps it will go away," said Lucy.
"It'll be worse if it does," said Edmund, "because then we shan't know where it is. If there's a wasp in the room I like to be able to see it."
The rest of the night was dreadful, and when the meal came, though they knew they ought to eat, many found that they had very poor appetites. And endless hours seemed to pass before the darkness thinned and birds began chirping here and there and the world got colder and wetter than it had been all night and Caspian said, "Now for it, friends."
They got up, all with swords drawn, and formed themselves into a solid mass with Lucy in the middle and Reepicheep on her shoulder. It was nicer than the waiting about and everyone felt fonder of everyone else than at ordinary times. A moment later they were marching. It grew lighter as they came to the edge of the wood. And there on the sand, like a giant lizard, or a flexible crocodile, or a serpent with legs, huge and horrible and humpy, lay the dragon.
But when it saw them, instead of rising up and blowing fire and smoke, the dragon retreated—you could almost say it waddled—back into the shallows of the bay.
"What's it wagging its head like that for?" said Edmund.
"And now it's nodding," said Caspian,
"And there's something coming from its eyes," said Drinian.
"Oh, can't you see," said Lucy. "It's crying. Those are tears."
"I shouldn't trust to that, Ma'am," said Drinian. "That's what crocodiles do, to put you off your guard."
"It wagged its head when you said that," remarked Edmund. "Just as if it meant No. Look, there it goes again."
"Do you think it understands what we're saying?" asked Lucy.
The dragon nodded its head violently.
Reepicheep slipped off Lucy's shoulder and stepped to the front.
"Dragon," came his shrill voice, "can you understand speech?"
The dragon nodded.
"Can you speak?"
It shook its head.
"Then," said Reepicheep, "it is idle to ask you your business. But if you will swear friendship with us raise your left foreleg above your head."
It did so, but clumsily because that leg was sore and swollen with the golden bracelet.
"Oh look," said Lucy, "there's something wrong with its leg. The poor thing—that's probably what it was crying about. Perhaps it came to us to be cured like in Androcles and the lion."
"Be careful, Lucy," said Caspian. "It's a very clever dragon but it may be a liar."
Lucy had, however, already run forward, followed by Reepicheep, as fast as his short legs could carry him, and then of course the boys and Drinian came, too.
"Show me your poor paw," said Lucy, "I might be able to cure it."
The dragon-that-had-been-Eustace held out its sore leg gladly enough, remembering how Lucy's cordial had cured him of sea-sickness before he became a dragon. But he was disappointed. The magic fluid reduced the swelling and eased the pain a little but it could not dissolve the gold.
Everyone had now crowded round to watch the treatment, and Caspian suddenly exclaimed, "Look!" He was staring at the bracelet.
"Look at what?" said Edmund.
"Look at the device on the gold," said Caspian.
"A little hammer with a diamond above it like a star," said Drinian. "Why, I've seen that before."
"Seen it!" said Caspian. "Why, of course you have. It is the sign of a great Narnian house. This is the Lord Octesian's arm-ring."
"Villain," said Reepicheep to the dragon, "have you devoured a Narnian lord?" But the dragon shook his head violently.
"Or perhaps," said Lucy, "this is the Lord Octesian, turned into a dragon—under an enchantment, you know."
"It needn't be either," said Edmund. "All dragons collect gold. But I think it's a safe guess that Octesian got no further than this island."
"Are you the Lord Octesian?" said Lucy to the dragon, and then, when it sadly shook its head, "Are you someone enchanted—someone human, I mean?"
It nodded violently.
And then someone said—people disputed afterwards whether Lucy or Edmund said it first—"You're not—not Eustace by any chance?"
And Eustace nodded his terrible dragon head and thumped his tail in the sea and everyone skipped back (some of the sailors with ejaculations I will not put down in writing) to avoid the enormous and boiling tears which flowed from his eyes.
Lucy tried hard to console him and even screwed up her courage to kiss the scaly face, and nearly everyone said "Hard luck" and several assured Eustace that they would all stand by him and many said there was sure to be some way of disenchanting him and they'd have him as right as rain in a day or two. And of course they were all very anxious to hear his story, but he couldn't speak. More than once in the days that followed he attempted to write it for them on the sand. But this never succeeded. In the first place Eustace (never having read the right books) had no idea how to tell a story straight. And for another thing, the muscles and nerves of the dragon-claws that he had to use had never learned to write and were not built for writing anyway. As a result he never got nearly to the end before the tide came in and washed away all the writing except the bits he had already trodden on or accidentally swished out with his tail. And all that anyone had seen would be something like this—the dots are for the bits he had smudged out—
I WNET TO SLEE ... RGOS AGRONS I MEAN DRANGONS CAVE CAUSE ITWAS DEAD AND AINIG SO HAR ... WOKE UP AND COU ... GET OFFF MI ARM OH BOTHER ...
It was, however, clear to everyone that Eustace's character had been rather improved by becoming a dragon. He was anxious to help. He flew over the whole island and found that it was all mountainous and inhabited only by wild goats and droves of wild swine. Of these he brought back many carcases as provisions for the ship. He was a very humane killer too, for he could dispatch a beast with one blow of his tail so that it didn't know (and presumably still doesn't know) it had been killed. He ate a few himself, of course, but always alone, for now that he was a dragon he liked his food raw but he could never bear to let the others see him at his messy meals. And one day, flying slowly and wearily but in great triumph, he bore back to camp a great tall pine tree which he had torn up by the roots in a distant valley and which could be made into a capital mast. And in the evening if it turned chilly, as it sometimes did after the heavy rains, he was a comfort to everyone, for the whole party would come and sit with their backs against his hot sides and get well warmed and dried; and one puff of his fiery breath would light the most obstinate fire. Sometimes he would take a select party for a fly on his back, so that they could see wheeling below them the green slopes, the rocky heights, the narrow pit-like valleys, and far out over the sea to the eastward a spot of darker blue on the blue horizon which might be land.
The pleasure (quite new to him) of being liked and, still more, of liking other people, was what kept Eustace from despair. For it was very dreary being a dragon. He shuddered whenever he caught sight of his own reflection as he flew over a mountain lake. He hated the huge batlike wings, the saw-edged ridge on his back, and the cruel curved claws. He was almost afraid to be alone with himself and yet he was ashamed to be with the others. On the evenings when he was not being used as a hot-water bottle he would slink away from the camp and lie curled up like a snake between the wood and the water. On such occasions, greatly to his surprise, Reepicheep was his most constant comforter. The noble Mouse would creep away from the merry circle at the camp-fire and sit down by the dragon's head, well to the windward to be out of the way of his smoky breath. There he would explain that what had happened to Eustace was a striking illustration of the turn of Fortune's wheel, and that if he had Eustace at his own house in Narnia (it was really a hole not a house and the dragon's head, let alone his body, would not have fitted in) he could show him more than a hundred examples of emperors, kings, dukes, knights, poets, lovers, astronomers, philosophers, and magicians, who had fallen from prosperity into the most distressing circumstances, and of whom many had recovered and lived happily ever afterwards. It did not, perhaps, seem so very comforting at the time, but it was kindly meant and Eustace never forgot it.
But of course what hung over everyone like a cloud was the problem of what to do with their dragon when they were ready to sail. They tried not to talk of it when he was there, but he couldn't help overhearing things like, "Would he fit all along one side of the deck? And we'd have to shift all the stores to the other side down below so as to balance," or, "Would towing him be any good?" or "Would he be able to keep up by flying?" and (most often of all), "But how are we to feed him?" And poor Eustace realised more and more that since the first day he came on board he had been an unmitigated nuisance and that he was now a greater nuisance still. And this ate into his mind, just as that bracelet ate into his foreleg. He knew that it only made it worse to tear at it with his great teeth, but he couldn't help tearing now and then, especially on hot nights.
About six days after they had landed on Dragon Island Edmund happened to wake up very early one morning. It was just getting grey so that you could see the tree-trunks if they were between you and the bay but not in the other direction. As he woke he thought he heard something moving, so he raised himself on one elbow and looked about him: and presently he thought he saw a dark figure moving on the seaward side of the wood. The idea that at once occurred to his mind was, "Are we so sure there are no natives on this island after all?" Then he thought it was Caspian—it was about the right size—but he knew that Caspian had been sleeping next to him and could see that he hadn't moved. Edmund made sure that his sword was in its place and then rose to investigate.
He came down softly to the edge of the wood and the dark figure was still there. He saw now that it was too small for Caspian and too big for Lucy. It did not run away. Edmund drew his sword and was about to challenge the stranger when the stranger said in a low voice,
"Is that you, Edmund?"
"Yes. Who are you?" said he.
"Don't you know me?" said the other. "It's me—Eustace."
"By jove," said Edmund, "so it is. My dear chap——"
"Hush," said Eustace and lurched as if he were going to fall.
"Hello!" said Edmund, steadying him. "What's up. Are you ill?"
Eustace was silent for so long that Edmund thought he was fainting; but at last he said, "It's been ghastly. You don't know ... but it's all right now. Could we go and talk somewhere? I don't want to meet the others just yet."
"Yes, rather, anywhere you like," said Edmund. "We can go and sit on the rocks over there. I say, I am glad to see you—er—looking yourself again. You must have had a pretty beastly time."
They went to the rocks and sat down looking out across the bay while the sky got paler and paler and the stars disappeared except for one very bright one low down and near the horizon.
"I won't tell you how I became a—a dragon till I can tell the others and get it all over," said Eustace. "By the way, I didn't even know it was a dragon till I heard you all using the word when I turned up here the other morning. I want to tell you how I stopped being one."
"Fire ahead," said Edmund.
"Well, last night I was more miserable than ever. And that beastly arm-ring was hurting like anything——"
"Is that all right now?"
Eustace laughed—a different laugh from any Edmund had heard him give before—and slipped the bracelet easily off his arm. "There it is," he said, "and anyone who likes can have it as far as I'm concerned. Well, as I say, I was lying awake and wondering what on earth would become of me. And then—but, mind you, it may have been all a dream. I don't know."
"Go on," said Edmund, with considerable patience.
"Well, anyway, I looked up and saw the very last thing I expected: a huge lion coming slowly towards me. And one queer thing was that there was no moon last night, but there was moonlight where the lion was. So it came nearer and nearer. I was terribly afraid of it. You may think that, being a dragon, I could have knocked any lion out easily enough. But it wasn't that kind of fear. I wasn't afraid of it eating me, I was just afraid of it—if you can understand. Well, it came close up to me and looked straight into my eyes. And I shut my eyes tight. But that wasn't any good because it told me to follow it."
"You mean it spoke?"
"I don't know. Now that you mention it, I don't think it did. But it told me all the same. And I knew I'd have to do what it told me, so I got up and followed it. And it led me a long way into the mountains. And there was always this moonlight over and round the lion wherever we went. So at last we came to the top of a mountain I'd never seen before and on the top of this mountain there was a garden—trees and fruit and everything. In the middle of it there was a well.
"I knew it was a well because you could see the water bubbling up from the bottom of it: but it was a lot bigger than most wells—like a very big, round bath with marble steps going down into it. The water was as clear as anything and I thought if I could get in there and bathe it would ease the pain in my leg. But the lion told me I must undress first. Mind you, I don't know if he said any words out loud or not.
"I was just going to say that I couldn't undress because I hadn't any clothes on when I suddenly thought that dragons are snaky sort of things and snakes can cast their skins. Oh, of course, thought I, that's what the lion means. So I started scratching myself and my scales began coming off all over the place. And then I scratched a little deeper and, instead of just scales coming off here and there, my whole skin started peeling off beautifully, like it does after an illness, or as if I was a banana. In a minute or two I just stepped out of it. I could see it lying there beside me, looking rather nasty. It was a most lovely feeling. So I started to go down into the well for my bathe.
"But just as I was going to put my feet into the water I looked down and saw that they were all hard and rough and wrinkled and scaly just as they had been before. Oh, that's all right, said I, it only means I had another smaller suit on underneath the first one, and I'll have to get out of it too. So I scratched and tore again and this under skin peeled off beautifully and out I stepped and left it lying beside the other one and went down to the well for my bathe.
"Well, exactly the same thing happened again. And I thought to myself, oh dear, how ever many skins have I got to take off? For I was longing to bathe my leg. So I scratched away for the third time and got off a third skin, just like the two others, and stepped out of it. But as soon as I looked at myself in the water I knew it had been no good.
"Then the lion said—but I don't know if it spoke—You will have to let me undress you. I was afraid of his claws, I can tell you, but I was pretty nearly desperate now. So I just lay flat down on my back to let him do it.
"The very first tear he made was so deep that I thought it had gone right into my heart. And when he began pulling the skin off, it hurt worse than anything I've ever felt. The only thing that made me able to bear it was just the pleasure of feeling the stuff peel off. You know—if you've ever picked the scab of a sore place. It hurts like billy-oh but it is such fun to see it coming away."
"I know exactly what you mean," said Edmund.
"Well, he peeled the beastly stuff right off—just as I thought I'd done it myself the other three times, only they hadn't hurt—and there it was lying on the grass: only ever so much thicker, and darker, and more knobbly looking than the others had been. And there was I as smooth and soft as a peeled switch and smaller than I had been. Then he caught hold of me—I didn't like that much for I was very tender underneath now that I'd no skin on—and threw me into the water. It smarted like anything but only for a moment. After that it became perfectly delicious and as soon as I started swimming and splashing I found that all the pain had gone from my arm. And then I saw why. I'd turned into a boy again. You'd think me simply phoney if I told you how I felt about my own arms. I know they've no muscle and are pretty mouldy compared with Caspian's, but I was so glad to see them.
"After a bit the lion took me out and dressed me——"
"Dressed you. With his paws?"
"Well, I don't exactly remember that bit. But he did somehow or other: in new clothes—the same I've got on now, as a matter of fact. And then suddenly I was back here. Which is what makes me think it must have been a dream."
"No. It wasn't a dream," said Edmund.
"Why not?"
"Well, there are the clothes, for one thing. And you have been—well, un-dragoned, for another."
"What do you think it was, then?" asked Eustace.
"I think you've seen Aslan," said Edmund.
"Aslan!" said Eustace. "I've heard that name mentioned several times since we joined the Dawn Treader. And I felt—I don't know what—I hated it. But I was hating everything then. And by the way, I'd like to apologise. I'm afraid I've been pretty beastly."
"That's all right," said Edmund. "Between ourselves, you haven't been as bad as I was on my first trip to Narnia. You were only an ass, but I was a traitor."
"Well, don't tell me about it, then," said Eustace. "But who is Aslan? Do you know him?"
"Well—he knows me," said Edmund. "He is the great Lion, the son of the Emperor over Sea, who saved me and saved Narnia. We've all seen him. Lucy sees him most often. And it may be Aslan's country we are sailing to."
Neither said anything for a while. The last bright star had vanished and though they could not see the sunrise because of the mountains on their right they knew it was going on because the sky above them and the bay before them turned the colour of roses. Then some bird of the parrot kind screamed in the wood behind them, they heard movements among the trees, and finally a blast on Caspian's horn. The camp was astir.
Great was the rejoicing when Edmund and the restored Eustace walked into the breakfast circle round the camp-fire. And now of course everyone heard the earlier part of his story. People wondered whether the other dragon had killed the Lord Octesian several years ago or whether Octesian himself had been the old dragon. The jewels with which Eustace had crammed his pockets in the cave had disappeared along with the clothes he had then been wearing: but no one, least of all Eustace himself, felt any desire to go back to that valley for more treasure.
In a few days now the Dawn Treader, re-masted, re-painted, and well stored, was ready to sail. Before they embarked Caspian caused to be cut on a smooth cliff facing the bay the words:
DRAGON ISLAND
DISCOVERED BY CASPIAN X, KING OF NARNIA, ETC.
IN THE FOURTH
YEAR OF HIS REIGN.
HERE, AS WE SUPPOSE, THE LORD OCTESIAN
HAD HIS DEATH
It would be nice, and fairly nearly true, to say that "from that time forth Eustace was a different boy". To be strictly accurate, he began to be a different boy. He had relapses. There were still many days when he could be very tiresome. But most of those I shall not notice. The cure had begun.
The Lord Octesian's arm ring had a curious fate. Eustace did not want it and offered it to Caspian and Caspian offered it to Lucy. She did not care about having it. "Very well, then, catch as catch can," said Caspian and flung it up in the air. This was when they were all standing looking at the inscription. Up went the ring, flashing in the sunlight, and caught, and hung, as neatly as a well-thrown quoit, on a little projection in the rock. No one could climb up to get it from below and no one could climb down to get it from above. And there, for all I know, it is hanging still and may hang till that world ends.
Everyone was cheerful as the Dawn Treader sailed from Dragon Island. They had fair wind as soon as they were out of the bay and came early next morning to the unknown land which some of them had seen when flying over the mountains while Eustace was still a dragon. It was a low green island inhabited by nothing but rabbits and a few goats, but from the ruins of stone huts, and from blackened places where fires had been, they judged that it had been peopled not long before. There were also some bones and broken weapons.
"Pirates' work," said Caspian.
"Or the dragon's," said Edmund.
The only other thing they found here was a little skin boat or coracle on the sands. It was made of hide stretched over a wicker framework. It was a tiny boat, barely four feet long, and the paddle which still lay in it was in proportion. They thought that either it had been made for a child or else that the people of that country had been Dwarfs. Reepicheep decided to keep it, as it was just the right size for him; so it was taken on board. They called that land Burnt Island and sailed away before noon.
For some five days they ran before a south-south-east wind, out of sight of all lands and seeing neither fish nor gull. Then they had a day that rained hard till the afternoon. Eustace lost two games of chess to Reepicheep and began to get rather like his old and disagreeable self again, and Edmund said he wished they could have gone to America with Susan. Then Lucy looked out of the stern windows and said:
"Hello! I do believe it's stopping. And what's that?"
They all tumbled up on to the poop at this and found that the rain had stopped and that Drinian, who was on watch, was also staring hard at something astern. Or rather, at several things. They looked a little like smooth rounded rocks, a whole line of them with intervals of about forty feet in between.
"But they can't be rocks," Drinian was saying, "because they weren't there five minutes ago."
"And one's just disappeared," said Lucy.
"Yes, and there's another one coming up," said Edmund.
"And nearer," said Eustace.
"Hang it!" said Caspian. "The whole thing is moving this way."
"And moving a great deal quicker than we can sail, Sire," said Drinian. "It'll be up with us in a minute."
They all held their breath, for it is not at all nice to be pursued by an unknown something either on land or sea. But what it turned out to be was far worse than anyone had suspected. Suddenly, only about the length of a cricket pitch from their port side, an appalling head reared itself out of the sea. It was all greens and vermilions with purple blotches—except where shell fish clung to it—and shaped rather like a horse's, though without ears. It had enormous eyes, eyes made for staring through the dark depths of the ocean, and a gaping mouth filled with double rows of sharp fish-like teeth. It came up on what they first took to be a huge neck, but as more and more of it emerged everyone knew that this was not its neck but its body and that at last they were seeing what so many people have foolishly wanted to see—the great Sea Serpent. The folds of its gigantic tail could be seen far away, rising at intervals from the surface. And now its head was towering up higher than the mast.
Every man rushed to his weapon, but there was nothing to be done, the monster was out of reach. "Shoot! Shoot!" cried the Master Bowman, and several obeyed, but the arrows glanced off the Sea Serpent's hide as if it was iron-plated. Then, for a dreadful minute, everyone was still, staring up at its eyes and mouth and wondering where it would pounce.
But it didn't pounce. It shot its head forward across the ship on a level with the yard of the mast. Now its head was just beside the fighting-top. Still it stretched and stretched till its head was over the starboard bulwark. Then down it began to come—not on to the crowded deck but into the water, so that the whole ship was under an arch of serpent. And almost at once that arch began to get smaller: indeed on the starboard the Sea Serpent was now almost touching the Dawn Treader's side.
Eustace (who had really been trying very hard to behave well, till the rain and the chess put him back) now did the first brave thing he had ever done. He was wearing a sword that Caspian had lent him. As soon as the serpent's body was near enough on the starboard side he jumped up on the bulwark and began hacking at it with all his might. It is true that he accomplished nothing beyond breaking Caspian's second best sword into bits, but it was a fine thing for a beginner to have done.
Others would have joined him if at that moment Reepicheep had not called out, "Don't fight! Push!" It was so unusual for the Mouse to advise anyone not to fight that, even in that terrible moment, every eye turned to him. And when he jumped up on the bulwark, forward of the snake, and set his little furry back against its huge scaly, slimy back, and began pushing as hard as he could, quite a number of people saw what he meant and rushed to both sides of the ship to do the same. And when, a moment later, the Sea Serpent's head appeared again, this time on the port side, and this time with its back to them, then everyone understood.
The brute had made a loop of itself round the Dawn Treader and was beginning to draw the loop tight. When it got quite tight—snap!—there would be floating matchwood where the ship had been and it could pick them out of the water one by one. Their only chance was to push the loop backward till it slid over the stern; or else (to put the same thing another way) to push the ship forward out of the loop.
Reepicheep alone had, of course, no more chance of doing this than of lifting up a cathedral, but he had nearly killed himself with trying before others shoved him aside. Very soon the whole ship's company except Lucy and the Mouse (which was fainting) was in two long lines along the two bulwarks, each man's chest to the back of the man in front, so that the weight of the whole line was in the last man, pushing for their lives. For a few sickening seconds (which seemed like hours) nothing appeared to happen. Joints cracked, sweat dropped, breath came in grunts and gasps. Then they felt that the ship was moving. They saw that the snake-loop was further from the mast than it had been. But they also saw that it was smaller. And now the real danger was at hand. Could they get it over the poop, or was it already too tight? Yes. It would just fit. It was resting on the poop rails. A dozen or more sprang up on the poop. This was far better. The Sea Serpent's body was so low now that they could make a line across the poop and push side by side. Hope rose high till everyone remembered the high carved stern, the dragon tail, of the Dawn Treader. It would be quite impossible to get the brute over that.
"An axe," cried Caspian hoarsely, "and still shove." Lucy, who knew where everything was, heard him where she was standing on the main deck staring up at the poop. In a few seconds she had been below, got the axe, and was rushing up the ladder to the poop. But just as she reached the top there came a great crashing noise like a tree coming down and the ship rocked and darted forward. For at that very moment, whether because the Sea Serpent was being pushed so hard, or because it foolishly decided to draw the noose tight, the whole of the carved stern broke off and the ship was free.
The others were too exhausted to see what Lucy saw. There, a few yards behind them, the loop of Sea Serpent's body got rapidly smaller and disappeared into a splash. Lucy always said (but of course she was very excited at the moment, and it may have been only imagination) that she saw a look of idiotic satisfaction on the creature's face. What is certain is that it was a very stupid animal, for instead of pursuing the ship it turned its head round and began nosing all along its own body as if it expected to find the wreckage of the Dawn Treader there. But the Dawn Treader was already well away, running before a fresh breeze, and the men lay and sat panting and groaning all about the deck, till presently they were able to talk about it, and then to laugh about it. And when some rum had been served out they even raised a cheer; and everyone praised the valour of Eustace (though it hadn't done any good) and of Reepicheep.
After this they sailed for three days more and saw nothing but sea and sky. On the fourth day the wind changed to the north and the seas began to rise; by the afternoon it had nearly become a gale. But at the same time they sighted land on their port bow.
"By your leave, Sire," said Drinian, "we will try to get under the lee of that country by rowing and lie in harbour, maybe, till this is over." Caspian agreed, but a long row against the gale did not bring them to the land before evening. By the last light of that day they steered into a natural harbour and anchored, but no one went ashore that night. In the morning they found themselves in the green bay of a rugged, lonely-looking country which sloped up to a rocky summit. From the windy north beyond that summit clouds came streaming rapidly. They lowered the boat and loaded her with any of the water casks which were now empty.
"Which stream shall we water at, Drinian?" said Caspian as he took his seat in the stern-sheets of the boat. "There seem to be two coming down into the bay."
"It makes little odds, Sire," said Drinian. "But I think it's a shorter pull to that on the starboard—the eastern one."
"Here comes the rain," said Lucy.
"I should think it does!" said Edmund, for it was already pelting hard. "I say, let's go to the other stream. There are trees there and we'll have some shelter."
"Yes, let's," said Eustace. "No point in getting wetter than we need."
But all the time Drinian was steadily steering to the starboard, like tiresome people in cars who continue at forty miles an hour while you are explaining to them that they are on the wrong road.
"They're right, Drinian," said Caspian. "Why don't you bring her head round and make for the western stream?"
"As your Majesty pleases," said Drinian a little shortly. He had had an anxious day with the weather yesterday, and he didn't like advice from landsmen. But he altered course; and it turned out afterwards that it was a good thing he did.
By the time they had finished watering, the rain was over and Caspian, with Eustace, the Pevensies, and Reepicheep, decided to walk up to the top of the hill and see what could be seen. It was a stiffish climb through coarse grass and heather and they saw neither man nor beast, except sea-gulls. When they reached the top they saw that it was a very small island, not more than twenty acres; and from this height the sea looked larger and more desolate than it did from the deck, or even the fighting-top of the Dawn Treader.
"Crazy, you know," said Eustace to Lucy in a low voice, looking at the eastern horizon. "Sailing on and on into that with no idea what we may get to." But he only said it out of habit, not really nastily as he would have done at one time.
It was too cold to stay long on the ridge for the wind still blew freshly from the north.
"Don't let us go back the same way," said Lucy as they turned; "let's go along a bit and come down by the other stream, the one Drinian wanted to go to."
Everyone agreed to this and after about fifteen minutes they were at the source of the second river. It was a more interesting place than they had expected; a deep little mountain lake, surrounded by cliffs except for a narrow channel on the sea-ward side out of which the water flowed. Here at last they were out of the wind, and all sat down in the heather above the cliff for a rest.
All sat down, but one (it was Edmund) jumped up again very quickly.
"They go in for sharp stones on this island," he said, groping about in the heather. "Where is the wretched thing? ... Ah, now I've got it.... Hullo! It wasn't a stone, at all, it's a sword-hilt. No, by jove, it's a whole sword; what the rust has left of it. It must have lain here for ages."
"Narnian, too, by the look of it," said Caspian, as they all crowded round.
"I'm sitting on something too," said Lucy. "Something hard." It turned out to be the remains of a mail-shirt. By this time everyone was on hands and knees, feeling in the thick heather in every direction. Their search revealed, one by one, a helmet, a dagger, and a few coins; not Calormen crescents but genuine Narnian "Lions" and "Trees" such as you might see any day in the market place of Beaversdam or Beruna.
"Looks as if this might be all that's left of one of our seven lords," said Edmund.
"Just what I was thinking," said Caspian. "I wonder which it was. There's nothing on the dagger to show. And I wonder how he died."
"And how we are to avenge him," added Reepicheep.
Edmund, the only one of the party who had read several detective stories, had meanwhile been thinking.
"Look here," he said, "there's something very fishy about this. He can't have been killed in a fight."
"Why not?" asked Caspian.
"No bones," said Edmund. "An enemy might take the armour and leave the body. But who ever heard of a chap who'd won a fight carrying away the body and leaving the armour?"
"Perhaps he was killed by a wild animal," Lucy suggested.
"It'd be a clever animal," said Edmund, "that would take a man's mail shirt off."
"Perhaps a dragon?" said Caspian.
"Nothing doing," said Eustace. "A dragon couldn't do it. I ought to know."
"Well, let's get away from the place, anyway," said Lucy. She had not felt like sitting down again since Edmund had raised the question of bones.
"If you like," said Caspian, getting up. "I don't think any of this stuff is worth taking away."
They came down and round to the little opening where the stream came out of the lake, and stood looking at the deep water within the circle of cliffs. If it had been a hot day, no doubt some would have been tempted to bathe and everyone would have had a drink. Indeed, even as it was, Eustace was on the very point of stooping down and scooping up some water in his hands when Reepicheep and Lucy both at the same moment cried, "Look", so he forgot about his drink and looked.
The bottom of the pool was made of large greyish-blue stones and the water was perfectly clear, and on the bottom lay a life-size figure of a man, made apparently of gold. It lay face downwards with its arms stretched out above its head. And it so happened that as they looked at it, the clouds parted and the sun shone out. The golden shape was lit up from end to end. Lucy thought it was the most beautiful statue she had ever seen.
"Well!" whistled Caspian. "That was worth coming to see! I wonder, can we get it out?"
"We can dive for it, Sire," said Reepicheep.
"No good at all," said Edmund. "At least, if it's really gold—solid gold—it'll be far too heavy to bring up. And that pool's twelve or fifteen feet deep if it's an inch. Half a moment, though. It's a good thing I've brought a hunting spear with me. Let's see what the depth is like. Hold on to my hand, Caspian, while I lean out over the water a bit." Caspian took his hand and Edmund, leaning forward, began to lower his spear into the water.
Before it was half-way in Lucy said, "I don't believe the statue is gold at all. It's only the light. Your spear looks just the same colour."
"What's wrong?" asked several voices at once; for Edmund had suddenly let go of the spear.
"I couldn't hold it," gasped Edmund, "it seemed so heavy."
"And there it is on the bottom now," said Caspian, "and Lucy is right. It looks just the same colour as the statue."
But Edmund, who appeared to be having some trouble with his boots—at least he was bending down and looking at them—straightened himself all at once and shouted out in the sharp voice which people hardly ever disobey:
"Get back! Back from the water. All of you. At once!!"
They all did and stared at him.
"Look," said Edmund, "look at the toes of my boots."
"They look a bit yellow," began Eustace.
"They're gold, solid gold," interrupted Edmund. "Look at them. Feel them. The leather's pulled away from it already. And they're as heavy as lead."
"By Aslan!" said Caspian. "You don't mean to say——?"
"Yes, I do," said Edmund. "That water turns things into gold. It turned the spear into gold, that's why it got so heavy. And it was just lapping against my feet (it's a good thing I wasn't barefoot) and it turned the toe-caps into gold. And that poor fellow on the bottom—well, you see."
"So it isn't a statue at all," said Lucy in a low voice.
"No. The whole thing is plain now. He was here on a hot day. He undressed on top of the cliff—where we were sitting. The clothes have rotted away or been taken by birds to line nests with; the armour's still there. Then he dived and——"
"Don't," said Lucy. "What a horrible thing."
"And what a narrow shave we've had," said Edmund.
"Narrow indeed," said Reepicheep. "Anyone's finger, anyone's foot, anyone's whisker, or anyone's tail, might have slipped into the water at any moment."
"All the same," said Caspian, "we may as well test it." He stooped down and wrenched up a spray of heather. Then, very cautiously, he knelt beside the pool and dipped it in. It was heather that he dipped; what he drew out was a perfect model of heather made of the purest gold, heavy and soft as lead.
"The King who owned this island," said Caspian slowly, and his face flushed as he spoke, "would soon be the richest of all the Kings of the world. I claim this land for ever as a Narnian possession. It shall be called Goldwater Island. And I bind all you to secrecy. No one must know of this. Not even Drinian—on pain of death, do you hear?"
"Who are you talking to?" said Edmund. "I'm no subject of yours. If anything it's the other way round. I am one of the four ancient sovereigns of Narnia and you are under allegiance to the High King my brother."
"So it has come to that, King Edmund, has it?" said Caspian, laying his hand on his sword-hilt.
"Oh, stop it, both of you," said Lucy. "That's the worst of doing anything with boys. You're all such swaggering, bullying idiots—oooh!——" Her voice died away into a gasp. And everyone else saw what she had seen.
Across the grey hillside above them—grey, for the heather was not yet in bloom—without noise, and without looking at them, and shining as if he were in bright sunlight though the sun had in fact gone in, passed with slow pace the hugest lion that human eyes have ever seen. In describing the scene Lucy said afterwards, "He was the size of an elephant," though at another time she only said, "The size of a cart-horse." But it was not the size that mattered. Nobody dared to ask what it was. They knew it was Aslan.
And nobody ever saw how or where he went. They looked at one another like people waking from sleep.
"What were we talking about?" said Caspian. "Have I been making rather an ass of myself?"
"Sire," said Reepicheep, "this is a place with a curse on it. Let us get back on board at once. And if I might have the honour of naming this island, I should call it Deathwater."
"That strikes me as a very good name, Reep," said Caspian, "though now that I come to think of it, I don't know why. But the weather seems to be settling and I dare say Drinian would like to be off. What a lot we shall have to tell him."
But in fact they had not much to tell him for the memory of the last hour had all become confused.
"Their Majesties all seemed a bit bewitched when they came aboard," said Drinian to Rhince some hours later when the Dawn Treader was once more under sail and Deathwater Island already below the horizon. "Something happened to them in that place. The only thing I could get clear was that they think they've found the body of one of these lords we're looking for."
"You don't say so, Captain," answered Rhince. "Well, that's three. Only five more. At this rate we might be home soon after the New Year. And a good thing too. My baccy's running a bit low. Good night, Sir."
And now the winds which had so long been from the north-west began to blow from the west itself and every morning when the sun rose out of the sea the curved prow of the Dawn Treader stood up right across the middle of the sun. Some thought that the sun looked larger than it looked from Narnia, but others disagreed. And they sailed and sailed before a gentle yet steady breeze and saw neither fish nor gull nor ship nor shore. And stores began to get low again, and it crept into their hearts that perhaps they might have come to a sea which went on for ever. But when the very last day on which they thought they could risk continuing their eastward voyage dawned, it showed, right ahead between them and the sunrise, a low land lying like a cloud.
They made harbour in a wide bay about the middle of the afternoon and landed. It was a very different country from any they had yet seen. For when they had crossed the sandy beach they found all silent and empty as if it were an uninhabited land, but before them there were level lawns in which the grass was as smooth and short as it used to be in the grounds of a great English house where ten gardeners were kept. The trees, of which there were many, all stood well apart from one another, and there were no broken branches and no leaves lying on the ground. Pigeons sometimes cooed but there was no other noise.
Presently they came to a long, straight, sanded path with not a weed growing on it and trees on either hand. Far off at the other end of this avenue they now caught sight of a house—very long and grey and quiet-looking in the afternoon sun.
Almost as soon as they entered this path Lucy noticed that she had a little stone in her shoe. In that unknown place it might have been wiser for her to ask the others to wait while she took it out. But she didn't; she just dropped quietly behind and sat down to take off her shoe. Her lace had got into a knot.
Before she had undone the knot the others were a fair distance ahead. By the time she had got the stone out and was putting the shoe on again she could no longer hear them. But almost at once she heard something else. It was not coming from the direction of the house.
What she heard was a thumping. It sounded as if dozens of strong workmen were hitting the ground as hard as they could with great wooden mallets. And it was very quickly coming nearer. She was already sitting with her back to a tree, and as the tree was not one she could climb, there was really nothing to do but to sit dead still and press herself against the tree and hope she wouldn't be seen.
Thump, thump, thump ... and whatever it was must be very close now for she could feel the ground shaking. But she could see nothing. She thought the thing—or things—must be just behind her. But then there came a thump on the path right in front of her. She knew it was on the path not only by the sound but because she saw the sand scatter as if it had been struck a heavy blow. But she could see nothing that had struck it. Then all the thumping noises drew together about twenty feet away from her and suddenly ceased. Then came the Voice.
It was really very dreadful because she could still see nobody at all. The whole of that park-like country still looked as quiet and empty as it had looked when they first landed. Nevertheless, only a few feet away from her, a voice spoke. And what it said was:
"Mates, now's our chance."
Instantly a whole chorus of other voices replied, "Hear him. Hear him. Now's our chance, he said. Well done, Chief. You never said a truer word."
"What I say," continued the first voice, "is, get down to the shore between them and their boat, and let every mother's son look to his weapons. Catch 'em when they try to put to sea."
"Eh, that's the way," shouted all the other voices. "You never made a better plan, Chief. Keep it up, Chief. You couldn't have a better plan than that."
"Lively, then, mates, lively," said the first voice. "Off we go."
"Right again, Chief," said the others. "Couldn't have a better order. Just what we were going to say ourselves. Off we go."
Immediately the thumping began again—very loud at first but soon fainter and fainter, till it died out in the direction of the sea.
Lucy knew there was no time to sit puzzling as to what these invisible creatures might be. As soon as the thumping noise had died away she got up and ran along the path after the others as quickly as her legs would carry her. They must at all costs be warned.
While this had been happening the others had reached the house. It was a low building—only two stories high—made of a beautiful mellow stone, many windowed, and partially covered with ivy. Everything was so still that Eustace said, "I think it's empty," but Caspian silently pointed to the column of smoke which rose from one chimney.
They found a wide gateway open and passed through it into a paved courtyard. And it was here that they had their first indication that there was something odd about this island. In the middle of the courtyard stood a pump, and beneath the pump a bucket. There was nothing odd about that. But the pump handle was moving up and down, though there seemed to be no one moving it.
"There's some magic at work here," said Caspian.
"Machinery!" said Eustace. "I do believe we've come to a civilised country at last."
At that moment Lucy, hot and breathless, rushed into the courtyard behind them. In a low voice she tried to make them understand what she had overheard. And when they had partly understood it even the bravest of them did not look very happy.
"Invisible enemies," muttered Caspian. "And cutting us off from the boat. This is an ugly furrow to plough."
"You've no idea what sort of creatures they are, Lu?" asked Edmund.
"How can I, Ed, when I couldn't see them?"
"Did they sound like humans from their footsteps?"
"I didn't hear any noise of feet—only voices and this frightful thudding and thumping—like a mallet."
"I wonder," said Reepicheep, "do they become visible when you drive a sword into them?"
"It looks as if we shall find out," said Caspian. "But let's get out of this gateway. There's one of these gentry at that pump listening to all we say."
They came out and went back into the path where the trees might possibly make them less conspicuous. "Not that it's any good really," said Eustace, "trying to hide from people you can't see. They may be all round us."
"Now, Drinian," said Caspian. "How would it be if we gave up the boat for lost, went down to another part of the bay, and signalled to the Dawn Treader to stand in and take us aboard?"
"Not depth for her, Sire," said Drinian.
"We could swim," said Lucy.
"Your Majesties all," said Reepicheep, "hear me. It is folly to think of avoiding an invisible enemy by any amount of creeping and skulking. If these creatures mean to bring us to battle, be sure they will succeed. And whatever comes of it I'd sooner meet them face to face than be caught by the tail."
"I really think Reep is in the right this time," said Edmund.
"Surely," said Lucy, "if Rhince and the others on the Dawn Treader see us fighting on the shore they'll be able to do something."
"But they won't see us fighting if they can't see any enemy," said Eustace miserably. "They'll think we're just swinging our swords in the air for fun."
There was an uncomfortable pause.
"Well," said Caspian at last, "let's get on with it. We must go and face them. Shake hands all round—arrow on the string, Lucy—swords out, everyone else—and now for it. Perhaps they'll parley."
It was strange to see the lawns and the great trees looking so peaceful as they marched back to the beach. And when they arrived there, and saw the boat lying where they had left her, and the smooth sand with no one to be seen on it, more than one doubted whether Lucy had not merely imagined all she had told them. But before they reached the sand, a voice spoke out of the air.
"No further, masters, no further now," it said. "We've got to talk with you first. There's fifty of us and more here with weapons in our fists."
"Hear him, hear him," came the chorus. "That's our Chief. You can depend on what he says. He's telling you the truth, he is."
"I do not see these fifty warriors," observed Reepicheep.
"That's right, that's right," said the Chief Voice. "You don't see us. And why not? Because we're invisible."
"Keep it up, Chief, keep it up," said the Other Voices. "You're talking like a book. They couldn't ask for a better answer than that."
"Be quiet, Reep," said Caspian, and then added in a louder voice, "You invisible people, what do you want with us? And what have we done to earn your enmity."
"We want something that little girl can do for us," said the Chief Voice. (The others explained that this was just what they would have said themselves.)
"Little girl!" said Reepicheep. "The lady is a queen."
"We don't know about queens," said the Chief Voice. ("No more we do, no more we do," chimed in the others.) "But we want something she can do."
"What is it?" said Lucy.
"And if it is anything against her Majesty's honour or safety," added Reepicheep, "you will wonder to see how many we can kill before we die."
"Well," said the Chief Voice. "It's a long story. Suppose we all sit down?"
The proposal was warmly approved by the other voices but the Narnians remained standing.
"Well," said the Chief Voice. "It's like this. This island has been the property of a great magician time out of mind. And we all are—or perhaps in a manner of speaking, I might say, we were—his servants. Well, to cut a long story short, this magician that I was speaking about, he told us to do something we didn't like. And why not? Because we didn't want to. Well, then, this same magician he fell into a great rage; for I ought to tell you he owned the island and he wasn't used to being crossed. He was terribly downright, you know. But let me see, where am I? Oh yes, this magician then, he goes upstairs (for you must know he kept all his magic things up there and we all lived down below), I say he goes upstairs and puts a spell on us. An uglifying spell. If you saw us now, which in my opinion you may thank your stars you can't, you wouldn't believe what we looked like before we were uglified. You wouldn't really. So there we all were so ugly we couldn't bear to look at one another. So then what did we do? Well, I'll tell you what we did. We waited till we thought this same magician would be asleep in the afternoon and we creep upstairs and go to his magic book, as bold as brass, to see if we can do anything about this uglification. But we were all of a sweat and a tremble, so I won't deceive you. But, believe me or believe me not, I do assure you that we couldn't find anything in the way of a spell for taking off the ugliness. And what with time getting on and being afraid that the old gentleman might wake up any minute—I was all of a muck sweat, so I won't deceive you—well, to cut a long story short, whether we did right or whether we did wrong, in the end we see a spell for making people invisible. And we thought we'd rather be invisible than go on being as ugly as all that. And why? Because we'd like it better. So my little girl, who's just about your little girl's age, and a sweet child she was before she was uglified, though now—but least said soonest mended—I say, my little girl she says the spell, for it's got to be a little girl or else the magician himself, if you see my meaning, for otherwise it won't work. And why not? Because nothing happens. So my Clipsie says the spell, for I ought to have told you she reads beautifully, and there we all were as invisible as you could wish to see. And I do assure you it was a relief not to see one another's faces. At first, anyway. But the long and the short of it is we're mortal tired of being invisible. And there's another thing. We never reckoned on this magician (the one I was telling you about before) going invisible too. But we haven't ever seen him since. So we don't know if he's dead, or gone away, or whether he's just sitting upstairs being invisible, and perhaps coming down and being invisible there. And, believe me, it's no manner of use listening because he always did go about with his bare feet on, making no more noise than a great big cat. And I'll tell all you gentlemen straight, it's getting more than what our nerves can stand."
Such was the Chief Voice's story, but very much shortened, because I have left out what the other voices said. Actually he never got out more than six or seven words without being interrupted by their agreements and encouragements, which drove the Narnians nearly out of their minds with impatience. When it was over there was a very long silence.
"But," said Lucy at last, "what's all this got to do with us? I don't understand."
"Why, bless me, if I haven't gone and left out the whole point," said the Chief Voice.
"That you have, that you have," roared the Other Voices with great enthusiasm. "No one couldn't have left it out cleaner and better. Keep it up, Chief, keep it up."
"Well, I needn't go over the whole story again," began the Chief Voice.
"No. Certainly not," said Caspian and Edmund.
"Well, then, to put it in a nutshell," said the Chief Voice, "we've been waiting for ever so long for a nice little girl from foreign parts, like it might be you, Missie—that would go upstairs and go to the magic book and find the spell that takes off the invisibleness, and say it. And we all swore that the first strangers as landed on this island (having a nice little girl with them, I mean, for if they hadn't it'd be another matter) we wouldn't let them go away alive unless they'd done the needful for us. And that's why, gentlemen, if your little girl doesn't come up to scratch, it will be our painful duty to cut all your throats. Merely in the way of business, as you might say, and no offence, I hope."
"I don't see all your weapons," said Reepicheep. "Are they invisible too?" The words were scarcely out of his mouth before they heard a whizzing sound and next moment a spear had stuck, quivering, in one of the trees behind them.
"That's a spear, that is," said the Chief Voice.
"That it is, Chief, that it is," said the others. "You couldn't have put it better."
"And it came from my hand," the Chief Voice continued. "They get visible when they leave us."
"But why do you want me to do this?" asked Lucy. "Why can't one of your own people? Haven't you got any girls?"
"We dursen't, we dursen't," said all the Voices. "We're not going upstairs again."
"In other words," said Caspian, "you are asking this lady to face some danger which you daren't ask your own sisters and daughters to face!"
"That's right, that's right," said all the Voices cheerfully. "You couldn't have said it better. Eh, you've had some education, you have. Anyone can see that."
"Well, of all the outrageous——" began Edmund, but Lucy interrupted.
"Would I have to go upstairs at night, or would it do in daylight?"
"Oh, daylight, daylight, to be sure," said the Chief Voice. "Not at night. No one's asking you to do that. Go upstairs in the dark? Ugh."
"All right, then, I'll do it," said Lucy. "No," she said, turning to the others, "don't try to stop me. Can't you see it's no use? There are dozens of them there. We can't fight them. And the other way there is a chance."
"But a magician!" said Caspian.
"I know," said Lucy. "But he mayn't be as bad as they make out. Don't you get the idea that these people are not very brave?"
"They're certainly not very clever," said Eustace.
"Look here, Lu," said Edmund. "We really can't let you do a thing like this. Ask Reep, I'm sure he'll say just the same."
"But it's to save my own life as well as yours," said Lucy. "I don't want to be cut to bits with invisible swords any more than anyone else."
"Her Majesty is in the right," said Reepicheep. "If we had any assurance of saving her by battle, our duty would be very plain. It appears to me that we have none. And the service they ask of her is in no way contrary to her Majesty's honour, but a noble and heroical act. If the Queen's heart moves her to risk the magician, I will not speak against it."
As no one had ever known Reepicheep to be afraid of anything, he could say this without feeling at all awkward. But the boys who had all been afraid quite often, grew very red. None the less, it was such obvious sense that they had to give in. Loud cheers broke from the invisible people when their decision was announced, and the Chief Voice (warmly supported by all the others) invited the Narnians to come to supper and spend the night. Eustace didn't want to accept, but Lucy said, "I'm sure they're not treacherous. They're not like that at all," and the others agreed. And so, accompanied by an enormous noise of thumpings (which became louder when they reached the flagged and echoing courtyard) they all went back to the house.
The invisible people feasted their guests royally. It was very funny to see the plates and dishes coming to the table and not to see anyone carrying them. It would have been funny even if they had moved along level with the floor, as you would expect things to do in invisible hands. But they didn't. They progressed up the long dining-hall in a series of bounds or jumps. At the highest point of each jump a dish would be about fifteen feet up in the air; then it would come down and stop quite suddenly about three feet from the floor. When the dish contained anything like soup or stew the result was rather disastrous.
"I'm beginning to feel very inquisitive about these people," whispered Eustace to Edmund. "Do you think they're human at all? More like huge grasshoppers or giant frogs, I should say."
"It does look like it," said Edmund. "But don't put the idea of the grasshoppers into Lucy's head. She's not too keen on insects; specially big ones."
The meal would have been pleasanter if it had not been so exceedingly messy, and also if the conversation had not consisted entirely of agreements. The invisible people agreed about everything. Indeed most of their remarks were the sort it would not be easy to disagree with: "What I always say is, when a chap's hungry, he likes some victuals", or "Getting dark now; always does at night", or even "Ah, you've come over the water. Powerful wet stuff, ain't it?" And Lucy could not help looking at the dark yawning entrance to the foot of the staircase—she could see it from where she sat—and wondering what she would find when she went up those stairs next morning. But it was a good meal otherwise, with mushroom soup and boiled chickens and hot boiled ham and gooseberries, red currants, curds, cream, milk, and mead. The others liked the mead but Eustace was sorry afterwards that he had drunk any.
When Lucy woke up next morning it was like waking up on the day of an examination or a day when you are going to the dentist. It was a lovely morning with bees buzzing in and out of her open window and the lawn outside looking very like somewhere in England. She got up and dressed and tried to talk and eat ordinarily at breakfast. Then, after being instructed by the Chief Voice about what she was to do upstairs, she bid good-bye to the others, said nothing, walked to the bottom of the stairs, and began going up them without once looking back.
It was quite light, that was one good thing. There was, indeed, a window straight ahead of her at the top of the first flight. As long as she was on that flight she could hear the tick-tock-tick-tock of a grandfather clock in the hall below. Then she came to the landing and had to turn to her left up the next flight; after that she couldn't hear the clock any more.
Now she had come to the top of the stairs. Lucy looked and saw a long, wide passage with a large window at the far end. Apparently the passage ran the whole length of the house. It was carved and panelled and carpeted and very many doors opened off it on each side. She stood still and couldn't hear the squeak of a mouse, or the buzzing of a fly, or the swaying of a curtain, or anything—except the beating of her own heart.
"The last doorway on the left," she said to herself. It did seem a bit hard that it should be the last. To reach it she would have to walk past room after room. And in any room there might be the magician—asleep, or awake, or invisible, or even dead. But it wouldn't do to think about that. She set out on her journey. The carpet was so thick that her feet made no noise.
"There's nothing whatever to be afraid of yet," Lucy told herself. And certainly it was a quiet, sunlit passage; perhaps a bit too quiet. It would have been nicer if there had not been strange signs painted in scarlet on the doors—twisty, complicated things which obviously had a meaning and it mightn't be a very nice meaning either. It would have been nicer still if there weren't those masks hanging on the wall. Not that they were exactly ugly—or not so very ugly—but the empty eye-holes did look queer, and if you let yourself you would soon start imagining that the masks were doing things as soon as your back was turned to them.
After about the sixth door she got her first real fright. For one second she felt almost certain that a wicked little bearded face had popped out of the wall and made a grimace at her. She forced herself to stop and look at it. And it was not a face at all. It was a little mirror just the size and shape of her own face, with hair on the top of it and a beard hanging down from it, so that when you looked in the mirror your own face fitted into the hair and beard and it looked as if they belonged to you. "I just caught my own reflection with the tail of my eye as I went past," said Lucy to herself. "That was all it was. It's quite harmless." But she didn't like the look of her own face with that hair and beard, and went on. (I don't know what the Bearded Glass was for because I am not a magician.)
Before she reached the last door on the left Lucy was beginning to wonder whether the corridor had grown longer since she began her journey and whether this was part of the magic of the house. But she got to it at last. And the door was open.
It was a large room with three big windows and it was lined from floor to ceiling with books; more books than Lucy had ever seen before, tiny little books, fat and dumpy books, and books bigger than any church Bible you have ever seen, all bound in leather and smelling old and learned and magical. But she knew from her instructions that she need not bother about any of these. For the Book, the Magic Book, was lying on a reading-desk in the very middle of the room. She saw she would have to read it standing (and anyway there were no chairs) and also that she would have to stand with her back to the door while she read it. So at once she turned to shut the door.
It wouldn't shut.
Some people may disagree with Lucy about this, but I think she was quite right. She said she wouldn't have minded if she could have shut the door, but that it was unpleasant to have to stand in a place like that with an open doorway right behind your back. I should have felt just the same. But there was nothing else to be done.
One thing that worried her a good deal was the size of the Book. The Chief Voice had not been able to give her any idea whereabouts in the Book the spell for making things visible came. He even seemed rather surprised at her asking. He expected her to begin at the beginning and go on till she came to it; obviously he had never thought that there was any other way of finding a place in a book. "But it might take me days and weeks!" said Lucy, looking at the huge volume, "and I feel already as if I'd been in this place for hours."
She went up to the desk and laid her hand on the book; her fingers tingled when she touched it as if it were full of electricity. She tried to open it but couldn't at first; this, however, was only because it was fastened by two leaden clasps, and when she had undone these it opened easily enough. And what a book it was!
It was written, not printed; written in a clear, even hand, with thick downstrokes and thin upstrokes, very large, easier than print, and so beautiful that Lucy stared at it for a whole minute and forgot about reading it. The paper was crisp and smooth and a nice smell came from it; and in the margins, and round the big coloured capital letters at the beginning of each spell, there were pictures.
There was no title page or title; the spells began straight away, and at first there was nothing very important in them. They were cures for warts (by washing your hands in moonlight in a silver basin) and toothache and cramp, and a spell for taking a swarm of bees. The picture of the man with toothache was so lifelike that it would have set your own teeth aching if you looked at it too long, and the golden bees which were dotted all round the fourth spell looked for a moment as if they were really flying.
Lucy could hardly tear herself away from that first page, but when she turned over, the next was just as interesting. "But I must get on," she told herself. And on she went for about thirty pages which, if she could have remembered them, would have taught her how to find buried treasure, how to remember things forgotten, how to forget things you wanted to forget, how to tell whether anyone was speaking the truth, how to call up (or prevent) wind, fog, snow, sleet or rain, how to produce enchanted sleeps and how to give a man an ass's head (as they did to poor Bottom). And the longer she read the more wonderful and more real the pictures became.
Then she came to a page which was such a blaze of pictures that one hardly noticed the writing. Hardly—but she did notice the first words. They were, An infallible spell to make beautiful her that uttereth it beyond the lot of mortals. Lucy peered at the pictures with her face close to the page, and though they had seemed crowded and muddlesome before, she found she could now see them quite clearly. The first was a picture of a girl standing at a reading-desk reading in a huge book. And the girl was dressed exactly like Lucy. In the next picture Lucy (for the girl in the picture was Lucy herself) was standing up with her mouth open and a rather terrible expression on her face, chanting or reciting something. In the third picture the beauty beyond the lot of mortals had come to her. It was strange, considering how small the pictures had looked at first, that the Lucy in the picture now seemed quite as big as the real Lucy; and they looked into each other's eyes and the real Lucy looked away after a few minutes because she was dazzled by the beauty of the other Lucy; though she could still see a sort of likeness to herself in that beautiful face. And now the pictures came crowding on her thick and fast. She saw herself throned on high at a great tournament in Calormen and all the Kings of the world fought because of her beauty. After that it turned from tournaments to real wars, and all Narnia and Archenland, Telmar and Calormen, Galma and Terebinthia, were laid waste with the fury of the kings and dukes and great lords who fought for her favour. Then it changed and Lucy, still beautiful beyond the lot of mortals, was back in England. And Susan (who had always been the beauty of the family) came home from America. The Susan in the picture looked exactly like the real Susan only plainer and with a nasty expression. And Susan was jealous of the dazzling beauty of Lucy, but that didn't matter a bit because no one cared anything about Susan now.
"I will say the spell," said Lucy. "I don't care. I will." She said I don't care because she had a strong feeling that she mustn't.
But when she looked back at the opening words of the spell, there in the middle of the writing, where she felt quite sure there had been no picture before, she found the great face of a lion, of The Lion, Aslan himself, staring into hers. It was painted such a bright gold that it seemed to be coming towards her out of the page; and indeed she never was quite sure afterwards that it hadn't really moved a little. At any rate she knew the expression on his face quite well. He was growling and you could see most of his teeth. She became horribly afraid and turned over the page at once.
A little later she came to a spell which would let you know what your friends thought about you. Now Lucy had wanted very badly to try the other spell, the one that made you beautiful beyond the lot of mortals. So she felt that to make up for not having said it, she really would say this one. And all in a hurry, for fear her mind would change, she said the words (nothing will induce me to tell you what they were). Then she waited for something to happen.
As nothing happened she began looking at the pictures. And all at once she saw the very last thing she expected—a picture of a third class carriage in a train, with two schoolgirls sitting in it. She knew them at once. They were Marjorie Preston and Anne Featherstone. Only now it was much more than a picture. It was alive. She could see the telegraph posts flicking past outside the window. She could see the two girls laughing and talking. Then gradually (like when the radio is "coming on") she could hear what they were saying.
"Shall I see anything of you this term?" said Anne, "or are you still going to be all taken up with Lucy Pevensie."
"Don't know what you mean by taken up," said Marjorie.
"Oh yes, you do," said Anne. "You were crazy about her last term."
"No, I wasn't," said Marjorie. "I've got more sense than that. Not a bad little kid in her way. But I was getting pretty tired of her before the end of term."
"Well, you jolly well won't have the chance any other term!" shouted Lucy. "Two-faced little beast." But the sound of her own voice at once reminded her that she was talking to a picture and that the real Marjorie was far away in another world.
"Well," said Lucy to herself, "I did think better of her than that. And I did all sorts of things for her last term, and I stuck to her when not many other girls would. And she knows it too. And to Anne Featherstone of all people! I wonder are all my friends the same? There are lots of other pictures. No. I won't look at any more. I won't, I won't"—and with a great effort she turned over the page; but not before a large, angry tear had splashed on it.
On the next page she came to a spell "for the refreshment of the spirit". The pictures were fewer here but very beautiful. And what Lucy found herself reading was more like a story than a spell. It went on for three pages and before she had read to the bottom of the page she had forgotten that she was reading at all. She was living in the story as if it were real, and all the pictures were real too. When she had got to the third page and come to the end, she said, "That is the loveliest story I've ever read or ever shall read in my whole life. Oh, I wish I could have gone on reading it for ten years. At least I'll read it over again."
But here part of the magic of the Book came into play. You couldn't turn back. The right-hand pages, the ones ahead, could be turned; the left-hand pages could not.
"Oh, what a shame!" said Lucy. "I did so want to read it again. Well, at least, I must remember it. Let's see ... it was about ... about ... oh dear, it's all fading away again. And even this last page is going blank. This is a very queer book. How can I have forgotten? It was about a cup and a sword and a tree and a green hill, I know that much. But I can't remember and what shall I do?"
And she never could remember; and ever since that day what Lucy means by a good story is a story which reminds her of the forgotten story in the Magician's Book.
She turned on and found to her surprise a page with no pictures at all; but the first words were A Spell to make hidden things visible. She read it through to make sure of all the hard words and then said it out loud. And she knew at once that it was working because as she spoke the colours came into the capital letters at the top of the page and the pictures began appearing in the margins. It was like when you hold to the fire something written in Invisible Ink and the writing gradually shows up; only instead of the dingy colour of lemon juice (which is the easiest Invisible Ink) this was all gold and blue and scarlet. They were odd pictures and contained many figures that Lucy did not much like the look of. And then she thought, "I suppose I've made everything visible, and not only the Thumpers. There might be lots of other invisible things hanging about a place like this. I'm not sure that I want to see them all."
At that moment she heard soft, heavy footfalls coming along the corridor behind her; and of course she remembered what she had been told about the Magician walking in his bare feet and making no more noise than a cat. It is always better to turn round than to have anything creeping up behind your back. Lucy did so.
Then her face lit up till, for a moment (but of course she didn't know it), she looked almost as beautiful as that other Lucy in the picture, and she ran forward with a little cry of delight and with her arms stretched out. For what stood in the doorway was Aslan himself, the Lion, the highest of all High Kings. And he was solid and real and warm and he let her kiss him and bury herself in his shining mane. And from the low, earthquake-like sound that came from inside him, Lucy even dared to think that he was purring.
"Oh, Aslan," said she, "it was kind of you to come."
"I have been here all the time," said he, "but you have just made me visible."
"Aslan!" said Lucy almost a little reproachfully. "Don't make fun of me. As if anything I could do would make you visible!"
"It did," said Aslan. "Do you think I wouldn't obey my own rules?"
After a little pause he spoke again.
"Child," he said, "I think you have been eavesdropping."
"Eavesdropping?"
"You listened to what your two schoolfellows were saying about you."
"Oh that? I never thought that was eavesdropping, Aslan. Wasn't it magic?"
"Spying on people by magic is the same as spying on them in any other way. And you have misjudged your friend. She is weak, but she loves you. She was afraid of the older girl and said what she does not mean."
"I don't think I'd ever be able to forget what I heard her say."
"No, you won't."
"Oh dear," said Lucy. "Have I spoiled everything? Do you mean we would have gone on being friends if it hadn't been for this—and been really great friends—all our lives perhaps—and now we never shall."
"Child," said Aslan, "did I not explain to you once before that no one is ever told what would have happened?"
"Yes, Aslan, you did," said Lucy. "I'm sorry. But please——"
"Speak on, dear heart."
"Shall I ever be able to read that story again; the one I couldn't remember? Will you tell it to me, Aslan? Oh do, do, do."
"Indeed, yes, I will tell it to you for years and years. But now, come. We must meet the master of this house."
Lucy followed the great Lion out into the passage and at once she saw coming towards them an old man, barefoot, dressed in a red robe. His white hair was crowned with a chaplet of oakleaves, his beard fell to his girdle, and he supported himself with a curiously carved staff. When he saw Aslan he bowed low and said,
"Welcome, Sir, to the least of your houses."
"Do you grow weary, Coriakin, of ruling such foolish subjects as I have given you here?"
"No," said the Magician, "they are very stupid but there is no real harm in them. I begin to grow rather fond of the creatures. Sometimes, perhaps, I am a little impatient, waiting for the day when they can be governed by wisdom instead of this rough magic."
"All in good time, Coriakin," said Aslan.
"Yes, all in very good time, Sir," was the answer. "Do you intend to show yourself to them?"
"Nay," said the Lion, with a little half growl that meant (Lucy thought) the same as a laugh. "I should frighten them out of their senses. Many stars will grow old and come to take their rest in islands before your people are ripe for that. And to-day before sunset I must visit Trumpkin the Dwarf where he sits in the castle of Cair Paravel counting the days till his master Caspian comes home. I will tell him all your story, Lucy. Do not look so sad. We shall meet soon again."
"Please, Aslan," said Lucy, "what do you call soon?"
"I call all times soon," said Aslan; and instantly he was vanished away and Lucy was alone with the Magician.
"Gone!" said he, "and you and I quite crestfallen. It's always like that, you can't keep him; it's not as if he were a tame lion. And how did you enjoy my book?"
"Parts of it very much indeed," said Lucy. "Did you know I was there all the time?"
"Well, of course I knew when I let the Duffers make themselves invisible that you would be coming along presently to take the spell off. I wasn't quite sure of the exact day. And I wasn't especially on the watch this morning. You see they had made me invisible too and being invisible always makes me so sleepy. Heigh-ho—there I'm yawning again. Are you hungry?"
"Well, perhaps I am a little," said Lucy. "I've no idea what the time is."
"Come," said the Magician. "All times may be soon to Aslan; but in my home all hungry times are one o'clock."
He led her a little way down the passage and opened a door. Passing in, Lucy found herself in a pleasant room full of sunlight and flowers. The table was bare when they entered, but it was of course a magic table, and at a word from the old man the tablecloth, silver, plates, glasses and food appeared.
"I hope that is what you would like," said he. "I have tried to give you food more like the food of your own land than perhaps you have had lately."
"It's lovely," said Lucy, and so it was; an omelette, piping hot, cold lamb and green peas, a strawberry ice, lemon-squash to drink with the meal and a cup of chocolate to follow. But the magician himself drank only wine and ate only bread. There was nothing alarming about him, and Lucy and he were soon chatting away like old friends.
"When will the spell work?" asked Lucy. "Will the Duffers be visible again at once?"
"Oh yes, they're visible now. But they're probably all asleep still; they always take a rest in the middle of the day."
"And now that they're visible, are you going to let them off being ugly? Will you make them as they were before?"
"Well, that's rather a delicate question," said the Magician. "You see, it's only they who think they were so nice to look at before. They say they've been uglified, but that isn't what I called it. Many people might say the change was for the better."
"Are they awfully conceited?"
"They are. Or at least the Chief Duffer is, and he's taught all the rest to be. They always believe every word he says."
"We'd noticed that," said Lucy.
"Yes—we'd get on better without him, in a way. Of course I could turn him into something else, or even put a spell on him which would make them not believe a word he said. But I don't like to do that. It's better for them to admire him than to admire nobody."
"Don't they admire you?" asked Lucy.
"Oh, not me," said the Magician. "They wouldn't admire me."
"What was it you uglified them for—I mean, what they call uglified?"
"Well, they wouldn't do what they were told. Their work is to mind the garden and raise food—not for me, as they imagine, but for themselves. They wouldn't do it at all if I didn't make them. And of course for a garden you want water. There is a beautiful spring about half a mile away up the hill. And from that spring there flows a stream which comes right past the garden. All I asked them to do was to take their water from the stream instead of trudging up to the spring with their buckets two or three times a day and tiring themselves out besides spilling half of it on the way back. But they wouldn't see it. In the end they refused point blank."
"Are they as stupid as all that?" asked Lucy.
The Magician sighed. "You wouldn't believe the troubles I've had with them. A few months ago they were all for washing up the plates and knives before dinner: they said it saved time afterwards. I've caught them planting boiled potatoes to save cooking them when they were dug up. One day the cat got into the dairy and twenty of them were at work moving all the milk out; no one thought of moving the cat. But I see you've finished. Let's go and look at the Duffers now they can be looked at."
They went into another room which was full of polished instruments hard to understand—such as Astrolabes, Orreries, Chronoscopes, Poesimeters, Choriambuses and Theodolinds—and here, when they had come to the window the Magician said, "There. There are your Duffers."
"I don't see anybody," said Lucy. "And what are those mushroom things?"
The things she pointed at were dotted all over the level grass. They were certainly very like mushrooms, but far too big—the stalks about three feet high and the umbrellas about the same length from edge to edge. When she looked carefully she noticed too that the stalks joined the umbrellas not in the middle but at one side which gave an unbalanced look to them. And there was something—a sort of little bundle—lying on the grass at the foot of each stalk. In fact the longer she gazed at them the less like mushrooms they appeared. The umbrella part was not really round as she had thought at first. It was longer than it was broad, and it widened at one end. There were a great many of them, fifty or more.
The clock struck three.
Instantly a most extraordinary thing happened. Each of the "mushrooms" suddenly turned upside-down. The little bundles which had lain at the bottom of the stalks were heads and bodies. The stalks themselves were legs. But not two legs to each body. Each body had a single thick leg right under it (not to one side like the leg of a one-legged man) and at the end of it, a single enormous foot—a broad-toed foot with the toes curling up a little so that it looked rather like a small canoe. She saw in a moment why they had looked like mushrooms. They had been lying flat on their backs each with its single leg straight up in the air and its enormous foot spread out above it. She learned afterwards that this was their ordinary way of resting; for the foot kept off both rain and sun and for a Monopod to lie under its own foot is almost as good as being in a tent.
"Oh, the funnies, the funnies," cried Lucy, bursting into laughter. "Did you make them like that?"
"Yes, yes, I made the Duffers into Monopods," said the Magician. He too was laughing till the tears ran down his cheeks. "But watch," he added.
It was worth watching. Of course these little one-footed men couldn't walk or run as we do. They got about by jumping, like fleas or frogs. And what jumps they made!—as if each big foot were a mass of springs. And with what a bounce they came down; that was what made the thumping noise which had so puzzled Lucy yesterday. For now they were jumping in all directions and calling out to one another, "Hey, lads! We're visible again."
"Visible we are," said one in a tasselled red cap who was obviously the Chief Monopod. "And what I say is, when chaps are visible, why they can see one another."
"Ah, there it is, there it is, Chief," cried all the others. "There's the point. No one's got a clearer head than you. You couldn't have made it plainer."
"She caught the old man napping, that little girl did," said the Chief Monopod. "We've beaten him this time."
"Just what we were going to say ourselves," chimed the chorus. "You're going stronger than ever to-day, Chief. Keep it up, keep it up."
"But do they dare to talk about you like that?" said Lucy. "They seemed to be so afraid of you yesterday. Don't they know you might be listening?"
"That's one of the funny things about the Duffers," said the Magician. "One minute they talk as if I ran everything and overheard everything and was extremely dangerous. The next moment they think they can take me in by tricks that a baby would see through—bless them!"
"Will they have to be turned back into their proper shapes?" asked Lucy. "Oh, I do hope it wouldn't be unkind to leave them as they are. Do they really mind very much? They seem pretty happy. I say—look at that jump. What were they like before?"
"Common little dwarfs," said he. "Nothing like so nice as the sort you have in Narnia."
"It would be a pity to change them back," said Lucy. "They're so funny: and they're rather nice. Do you think it would make any difference if I told them that?"
"I'm sure it would—if you could get it into their heads."
"Will you come with me and try?"
"No, no. You'll get on far better without me."
"Thanks awfully for the lunch," said Lucy and turned quickly away. She ran down the stairs which she had come up so nervously that morning and cannoned into Edmund at the bottom. All the others were there with him waiting, and Lucy's conscience smote her when she saw their anxious faces and realised how long she had forgotten them.
"It's all right," she shouted. "Everything's all right. The Magician's a brick—and I've seen him—Aslan."
After that she went from them like the wind and out into the garden. Here the earth was shaking with the jumps and the air ringing with the shouts of the Monopods. Both were redoubled when they caught sight of her.
"Here she comes, here she comes," they cried. "Three cheers for the little girl. Ah! She put it across the old gentleman properly, she did."
"And we're extremely regrettable," said the Chief Monopod, "that we can't give you the pleasure of seeing us as we were before we were uglified, for you wouldn't believe the difference, and that's the truth, for there's no denying we're mortal ugly now, so we won't deceive you."
"Eh, that we are, Chief, that we are," echoed the others, bouncing like so many toy balloons. "You've said it, you've said it."
"But I don't think you are at all," said Lucy, shouting to make herself heard. "I think you look very nice."
"Hear her, hear her," said the Monopods. "True for you, Missie. Very nice we look. You couldn't find a handsomer lot." They said this without any surprise and did not seem to notice that they had changed their minds.
"She's a-saying," remarked the Chief Monopod, "as how we looked very nice before we were uglified."
"True for you, Chief, true for you," chanted the others. "That's what she says. We heard her ourselves."
"I did not," bawled Lucy. "I said you're very nice now."
"So she did, so she did," said the Chief Monopod, "said we were very nice then."
"Hear 'em both, hear 'em both," said the Monopods. "There's a pair for you. Always right. They couldn't have put it better."
"But we're saying just the opposite," said Lucy, stamping her foot with impatience.
"So you are, to be sure, so you are," said the Monopods. "Nothing like an opposite. Keep it up, both of you."
"You're enough to drive anyone mad," said Lucy, and gave it up. But the Monopods seemed perfectly contented, and she decided that on the whole the conversation had been a success.
And before everyone went to bed that evening something else happened which made them even more satisfied with their one-legged condition. Caspian and all the Narnians went back as soon as possible to the shore to give their news to Rhince and the others on board the Dawn Treader, who were by now very anxious. And, of course, the Monopods went with them, bouncing like footballs and agreeing with one another in loud voices till Eustace said, "I wish the Magician would make them inaudible instead of invisible." (He was soon sorry he had spoken because then he had to explain that an inaudible thing is something you can't hear, and though he took a lot of trouble he never felt sure that the Monopods had really understood, and what especially annoyed him was that they said in the end, "Eh, he can't put things the way our Chief does. But you'll learn, young man. Hark to him. He'll show you how to say things. There's a speaker for you!") When they reached the bay, Reepicheep had a brilliant idea. He had his little coracle lowered and paddled himself about in it till the Monopods were thoroughly interested. He then stood up in it and said, "Worthy and intelligent Monopods, you do not need boats. Each of you has a foot that will do instead. Just jump as lightly as you can on the water and see what happens."
The Chief Monopod hung back and warned the others that they'd find the water powerful wet, but one or two of the younger ones tried it almost at once; and then a few others followed their example, and at last the whole lot did the same. It worked perfectly. The huge single foot of a Monopod acted as a natural raft or boat, and when Reepicheep had taught them how to cut rude paddles for themselves, they all paddled about the bay and round the Dawn Treader, looking for all the world like a fleet of little canoes with a fat dwarf standing up in the extreme stern of each. And they had races, and bottles of wine were lowered down to them from the ship as prizes, and the sailors stood leaning over the ship's sides and laughed till their own sides ached.
The Duffers were also very pleased with their new name of Monopods, which seemed to them a magnificent name though they never got it right. "That's what we are," they bellowed, "Moneypuds, Pomonods, Poddymons. Just what it was on the tips of our tongue to call ourselves." But they soon got it mixed up with their old name of Duffers and finally settled down to calling themselves the Dufflepuds; and that is what they will probably be called for centuries.
That evening all the Narnians dined upstairs with the Magician, and Lucy noticed how different the whole top floor looked now that she was no longer afraid of it. The mysterious signs on the doors were still mysterious but now looked as if they had kind and cheerful meanings and even the bearded mirror now seemed funny rather than frightening. At dinner everyone had by magic what everyone liked best to eat and drink. And after dinner the Magician did a very useful and beautiful piece of magic. He laid two blank sheets of parchment on the table and asked Drinian to give him an exact account of their voyage up to date: and as Drinian spoke, everything he described came out on the parchment in fine clear lines till at last each sheet was a splendid map of the Eastern Ocean, showing Galma, Terebinthia, the Seven Isles, the Lone Islands, Dragon Island, Burnt Island, Deathwater, and the land of the Duffers itself, all exactly the right sizes and in the right positions. They were the first maps ever made of those seas and better than any that have been made since without Magic. For on these, though the towns and mountains looked at first just as they would on an ordinary map, yet when the Magician lent them a magnifying glass you saw that they were perfect little pictures of the real things, so that you could see the very castle and slave market and streets in Narrowhaven, all very clear though very distant, like things seen through the wrong end of a telescope. The only drawback was that the coastline of most of the islands was incomplete, for the map showed only what Drinian had seen with his own eyes. When they were finished the Magician kept one himself and presented the other to Caspian: it still hangs in his Chamber of Instruments at Cair Paravel. But the Magician could tell them nothing about seas or lands further east. He did, however, tell them that about seven years before a Narnian ship had put in at his waters and that she had on board the lords Revilian, Argoz, Mavramorn and Rhoop: so they judged that the golden man they had seen lying in Deathwater must be the Lord Restimar.
Next day the Magician magically mended the stern of the Dawn Treader where it had been damaged by the sea serpent and loaded her with useful gifts. There was a most friendly parting, and when she sailed, two hours after noon, all the Dufflepuds paddled out with her to the harbour mouth, and cheered until she was out of sound of their cheering.
After this adventure they sailed on south and a little east for twelve days with a gentle wind, the skies being mostly clear and the air warm, and saw no bird or fish, except that once there were whales spouting a long way to starboard. Lucy and Reepicheep played a good deal of chess at this time. Then on the thirteenth day Edmund, from the fighting-top, sighted what looked like a great dark mountain rising out of the sea on their port bow.
They altered course and made for this land, mostly by oar, for the wind would not serve them to sail north-east. When evening fell they were still a long way from it and rowed all night. Next morning the weather was fair but a flat calm. The dark mass lay ahead, much nearer and larger, but still very dim, so that some thought it was still a long way off and others thought they were running into a mist.
About nine that morning, very suddenly, it was so close that they could see that it was not land at all, nor even, in an ordinary sense, a mist. It was a Darkness. It is rather hard to describe, but you will see what it was like if you imagine yourself looking into the mouth of a railway tunnel—a tunnel either so long or so twisty that you cannot see the light at the far end. And you know what it would be like. For a few feet you would see the rails and sleepers and gravel in broad daylight; then there would come a place where they were in twilight; and then, pretty suddenly, but of course without a sharp dividing line, they would vanish altogether into smooth, solid blackness. It was just so here. For a few feet in front of their bows they could see the swell of the bright greenish-blue water. Beyond that, they could see the water looking pale and grey as it would look late in the evening. But beyond that again, utter blackness as if they had come to the edge of moonless and starless night.
Caspian shouted to the boatswain to keep her back, and all except the rowers rushed forward and gazed from the bows. But there was nothing to be seen by gazing. Behind them was the sea and the sun, before them the Darkness.
"Do we go into this?" asked Caspian at length.
"Not by my advice," said Drinian.
"The Captain's right," said several sailors.
"I almost think he is," said Edmund.
Lucy and Eustace didn't speak but they felt very glad inside at the turn things seemed to be taking. But all at once the clear voice of Reepicheep broke in upon the silence.
"And why not?" he said. "Will someone explain to me why not."
No one was anxious to explain, so Reepicheep continued:
"If I were addressing peasants or slaves," he said, "I might suppose that this suggestion proceeded from cowardice. But I hope it will never be told in Narnia that a company of noble and royal persons in the flower of their age turned tail because they were afraid of the dark."
"But what manner of use would it be ploughing through that blackness?" asked Drinian.
"Use?" replied Reepicheep. "Use, Captain? If by use you mean filling our bellies or our purses, I confess it will be no use at all. So far as I know we did not set sail to look for things useful but to seek honour and adventures. And here is as great an adventure as ever I heard of, and here, if we turn back, no little impeachment of all our honours."
Several of the sailors said things under their breath that sounded like "Honour be blowed", but Caspian said:
"Oh, bother you, Reepicheep. I almost wish we'd left you at home. All right! If you put it that way, I suppose we shall have to go on. Unless Lucy would rather not?"
Lucy felt that she would very much rather not, but what she said out loud was, "I'm game."
"Your Majesty will at least order lights?" said Drinian.
"By all means," said Caspian. "See to it, Captain."
So the three lanterns, at the stern, and the prow and the masthead, were all lit, and Drinian ordered two torches amidships. Pale and feeble they looked in the sunshine. Then all the men except some who were left below at the oars were ordered on deck and fully armed and posted in their battle stations with swords drawn. Lucy and two archers were posted on the fighting-top with bows bent and arrows on the string. Rynelf was in the bows with his line ready to take soundings. Reepicheep, Edmund, Eustace and Caspian, glittering in mail, were with him. Drinian took the tiller.
"And now, in Aslan's name, forward," cried Caspian. "A slow, steady stroke. And let every man be silent and keep his ears open for orders."
With a creak and a groan the Dawn Treader started to creep forward as the men began to row. Lucy, up in the fighting-top, had a wonderful view of the exact moment at which they entered the darkness. The bows had already disappeared before the sunlight had left the stern. She saw it go. At one minute the gilded stern, the blue sea, and the sky, were all in broad daylight: next minute the sea and sky had vanished, the stern lantern—which had been hardly noticeable before—was the only thing to show where the ship ended. In front of the lantern she could see the black shape of Drinian crouching at the tiller. Down below her the two torches made visible two small patches of deck and gleamed on swords and helmets, and forward there was another island of light on the forecastle. Apart from that the fighting-top, lit by the masthead light which was only just above her, seemed to be a little lighted world of its own floating in lonely darkness. And the lights themselves, as always happens with lights when you have to have them at the wrong time of day, looked lurid and unnatural. She also noticed that she was very cold.
How long this voyage into the darkness lasted, nobody knew. Except for the creak of the rowlocks and the splash of the oars there was nothing to show that they were moving at all. Edmund, peering from the bows, could see nothing except the reflection of the lantern in the water before him. It looked a greasy sort of reflection, and the ripple made by their advancing prow appeared to be heavy, small, and lifeless. As time went on everyone except the rowers began to shiver with cold.
Suddenly, from somewhere—no one's sense of direction was very clear by now—there came a cry, either of some inhuman voice or else a voice of one in such extremity of terror that he had almost lost his humanity.
Caspian was still trying to speak—his mouth was too dry—when the shrill voice of Reepicheep, which sounded louder than usual in that silence, was heard.
"Who calls?" it piped. "If you are a foe we do not fear you, and if you are a friend your enemies shall be taught the fear of us."
"Mercy!" cried the voice. "Mercy! Even if you are only one more dream, have mercy. Take me on board. Take me, even if you strike me dead. But in the name of all mercies do not fade away and leave me in this horrible land."
"Where are you?" shouted Caspian. "Come aboard and welcome."
There came another cry, whether of joy or terror, and then they knew that someone was swimming towards them.
"Stand by to heave him up, men," said Caspian.
"Aye aye, your Majesty," said the sailors. Several crowded to the port bulwark with ropes and one, leaning far out over the side, held the torch. A wild, white face appeared in the blackness of the water, and then, after some scrambling and pulling, a dozen friendly hands had heaved the stranger on board.
Edmund thought he had never seen a wilder looking man. Though he did not otherwise look very old, his hair was an untidy mop of white, his face was thin and drawn, and, for clothing, only a few wet rags hung about him. But what one mainly noticed were his eyes, which were so widely opened that he seemed to have no eyelids at all, and stared as if in an agony of pure fear. The moment his feet reached the deck he said:
"Fly! Fly! About with your ship and fly! Row, row, row for your lives away from this accursed shore."
"Compose yourself," said Reepicheep, "and tell us what the danger is. We are not used to flying."
The stranger started horribly at the voice of the Mouse, which he had not noticed before.
"Nevertheless you will fly from here," he gasped. "This is the Island where Dreams come true."
"That's the island I've been looking for this long time," said one of the sailors. "I reckoned I'd find I was married to Nancy if we landed here."
"And I'd find Tom alive again," said another.
"Fools!" said the man, stamping his foot with rage. "That is the sort of talk that brought me here, and I'd better have been drowned or never born. Do you hear what I say? This is where dreams—dreams, do you understand—come to life, come real. Not daydreams: dreams."
There was about half a minute's silence and then, with a great clatter of armour, the whole crew were tumbling down the main hatch as quick as they could and flinging themselves on the oars to row as they had never rowed before; and Drinian was swinging round the tiller, and the boatswain was giving out the quickest stroke that had ever been heard at sea. For it had taken everyone just that half-minute to remember certain dreams they had had—dreams that make you afraid of going to sleep again—and to realise what it would mean to land on a country where dreams come true.
Only Reepicheep remained unmoved.
"Your Majesty, your Majesty," he said, "are you going to tolerate this mutiny, this poltroonery? This is a panic, this is a rout."
"Row, row," bellowed Caspian. "Pull for all our lives. Is her head right, Drinian? You can say what you like, Reepicheep. There are some things no man can face."
"It is, then, my good fortune not to be a man," replied Reepicheep with a very stiff bow.
Lucy from up aloft had heard it all. In an instant that one of her own dreams which she had tried hardest to forget came back to her as vividly as if she had only just woken from it. So that was what was behind them, on the island, in the darkness! For a second she wanted to go down to the deck and be with Edmund and Caspian. But what was the use? If dreams began coming true, Edmund and Caspian themselves might turn into something horrible just as she reached them. She gripped the rail of the fighting-top and tried to steady herself. They were rowing back to the light as hard as they could: it would be all right in a few seconds. But oh, if only it could be all right now!
Though the rowing made a good deal of noise it did not quite conceal the total silence which surrounded the ship. Everyone knew it would be better not to listen, not to strain his ears for any sound from the darkness. But no one could help listening. And soon everyone was hearing things. Each one heard something different.
"Do you hear a noise like ... like a huge pair of scissors opening and shutting ... over there?" Eustace asked Rynelf.
"Hush!" said Rynelf. "I can hear them crawling up the sides of the ship."
"It's just going to settle on the mast," said Caspian.
"Ugh!" said a sailor. "There are the gongs beginning. I knew they would."
Caspian, trying not to look at anything (especially not to keep looking behind him), went aft to Drinian.
"Drinian," he said in a very low voice. "How long did we take rowing in—I mean rowing to where we picked up the stranger."
"Five minutes, perhaps," whispered Drinian. "Why?"
"Because we've been more than that already trying to get out."
Drinian's hand shook on the tiller and a line of cold sweat ran down his face. The same idea was occurring to everyone on board. "We shall never get out, never get out," moaned the rowers. "He's steering us wrong. We're going round and round in circles. We shall never get out." The stranger, who had been lying in a huddled heap on the deck, sat up and burst out into a horrible screaming laugh.
"Never get out!" he yelled. "That's it. Of course. We shall never get out. What a fool I was to have thought they would let me go as easily as that. No, no, we shall never get out."
Lucy leant her head on the edge of the fighting-top and whispered, "Aslan, Aslan, if ever you loved us at all, send us help now." The darkness did not grow any less, but she began to feel a little—a very, very little—better. "After all, nothing has really happened to us yet," she thought.
"Look!" cried Rynelf's voice hoarsely from the bows. There was a tiny speck of light ahead, and while they watched a broad beam of light fell from it upon the ship. It did not alter the surrounding darkness, but the whole ship was lit up as if by a searchlight. Caspian blinked, stared round, saw the faces of his companions all with wild, fixed expressions. Everyone was staring in the same direction: behind everyone lay his black, sharply-edged shadow.
Lucy looked along the beam and presently saw something in it. At first it looked like a cross, then it looked like an aeroplane, then it looked like a kite, and at last with a whirring of wings it was right overhead and was an albatross. It circled three times round the mast and then perched for an instant on the crest of the gilded dragon at the prow. It called out in a strong sweet voice what seemed to be words though no one understood them. After that it spread its wings, rose, and began to fly slowly ahead, bearing a little to starboard. Drinian steered after it not doubting that it offered good guidance. But no one except Lucy knew that as it circled the mast it had whispered to her, "Courage, dear heart", and the voice, she felt sure, was Aslan's, and with the voice a delicious smell breathed in her face.
In a few moments the darkness turned into a greyness ahead, and then, almost before they dared to begin hoping, they had shot out into the sunlight and were in the warm, blue world again. And all at once everybody realised that there was nothing to be afraid of and never had been. They blinked their eyes and looked about them. The brightness of the ship herself astonished them: they had half expected to find that the darkness would cling to the white and the green and the gold in the form of some grime or scum. And then first one, and then another, began laughing.
"I reckon we've made pretty good fools of ourselves," said Rynelf.
Lucy lost no time in coming down to the deck, where she found the others all gathered round the newcomer. For a long time he was too happy to speak, and could only gaze at the sea and the sun and feel the bulwarks and the ropes, as if to make sure he was really awake, while tears rolled down his cheeks.
"Thank you," he said at last. "You have saved me from ... but I won't talk of that. And now let me know who you are. I am a Telmarine of Narnia, and when I was worth anything men called me the Lord Rhoop."
"And I," said Caspian, "am Caspian, King of Narnia, and I sail to find you and your companions who were my father's friends."
Lord Rhoop fell on his knees and kissed the King's hand. "Sire," he said, "you are the man in all the world I most wished to see. Grant me a boon."
"What is it?" asked Caspian.
"Never to bring me back there," he said. He pointed astern. They all looked. But they saw only bright blue sea and bright blue sky. The Dark Island and the darkness had vanished for ever.
"Why!" cried Lord Rhoop. "You have destroyed it!"
"I don't think it was us," said Lucy.
"Sire," said Drinian, "this wind is fair for the south-east. Shall I have our poor fellows up and set sail? And after that, every man who can be spared, to his hammock."
"Yes," said Caspian, "and let there be grog all round. Heigh-ho, I feel I could sleep the clock round myself."
So all afternoon with great joy they sailed south-east with a fair wind. But nobody noticed when the albatross had disappeared.
The wind never failed but it grew gentler every day till at length the waves were little more than ripples, and the ship glided on hour after hour almost as if they were sailing on a lake. And every night they saw that there rose in the east new constellations which no one had ever seen in Narnia and perhaps, as Lucy thought with a mixture of joy and fear, no living eye had seen at all. Those new stars were big and bright and the nights were warm. Most of them slept on deck and talked far into the night or hung over the ship's side watching the luminous dance of the foam thrown up by their bows.
On an evening of startling beauty, when the sunset behind them was so crimson and purple and widely spread that the very sky itself seemed to have grown larger, they came in sight of land on their starboard bow. It came slowly nearer and the light behind them made it look as if the capes and headlands of this new country were all on fire. But presently they were sailing along its coast and its western cape now rose up astern of them, black against the red sky and sharp as if it was cut out of cardboard, and then they could see better what this country was like. It had no mountains but many gentle hills with slopes like pillows. An attractive smell came from it—what Lucy called "a dim, purple kind of smell", which Edmund said (and Rhince thought) was rot, but Caspian said, "I know what you mean."
They sailed on a good way, past point after point, hoping to find a nice deep harbour, but had to content themselves in the end with a wide and shallow bay. Though it had seemed calm out at sea there was of course surf breaking on the sand and they could not bring the Dawn Treader as far in as they would have liked. They dropped anchor a good way from the beach and had a wet and tumbling landing in the boat. The Lord Rhoop remained on board the Dawn Treader. He wished to see no more islands. All the time that they remained in this country the sound of the long breakers was in their ears.
Two men were left to guard the boat and Caspian led the others inland, but not far because it was too late for exploring and the light would soon go. But there was no need to go far to find an adventure. The level valley which lay at the head of the bay showed no road or track or other sign of habitation. Underfoot was fine springy turf dotted here and there with a low bushy growth which Edmund and Lucy took for heather. Eustace, who was really rather good at botany, said it wasn't, and he was probably right; but it was something of very much the same kind.
When they had gone less than a bowshot from the shore, Drinian said, "Look! What's that?" and everyone stopped.
"Are they great trees?" said Caspian.
"Towers, I think," said Eustace.
"It might be giants," said Edmund in a lower voice.
"The way to find out is to go right in among them," said Reepicheep, drawing his sword and pattering off ahead of everyone else.
"I think it's a ruin," said Lucy when they had got a good deal nearer, and her guess was the best so far. What they now saw was a wide oblong space flagged with smooth stones and surrounded by grey pillars but unroofed. And from end to end of it ran a long table laid with a rich crimson cloth that came down nearly to the pavement. At either side of it were many chairs of stone richly carved and with silken cushions upon the seats. But on the table itself there was set out such a banquet as had never been seen, not even when Peter the High King kept his court at Cair Paravel. There were turkeys and geese and peacocks, there were boars' heads and sides of venison, there were pies shaped like ships under full sail or like dragons and elephants, there were ice puddings and bright lobsters and gleaming salmon, there were nuts and grapes, pineapples and peaches, pomegranates and melons and tomatoes. There were flagons of gold and silver and curiously wrought glass; and the smell of the fruit and the wine blew towards them like a promise of all happiness.
"I say," said Lucy.
They came nearer and nearer, all very quietly.
"But where are the guests?" asked Eustace.
"We can provide that, Sir," said Rhince.
"Look!" said Edmund sharply. They were actually within the pillars now and standing on the pavement. Everyone looked where Edmund had pointed. The chairs were not all empty. At the head of the table and in the two places beside it there was something—or possibly three somethings.
"What are those?" asked Lucy in a whisper. "It looks like three beavers sitting on the table."
"Or a huge bird's nest," said Edmund.
"It looks more like a haystack to me," said Caspian.
Reepicheep ran forward, jumped on a chair and thence on to the table, and ran along it, threading his way as nimbly as a dancer between jewelled cups and pyramids of fruit and ivory salt-cellars. He ran right up to the mysterious grey mass at the end: peered, touched, and then called out:
"These will not fight, I think."
Everyone now came close and saw that what sat in those three chairs was three men, though hard to recognise as men till you looked closely. Their hair, which was grey, had grown over their eyes till it almost concealed their faces, and their beards had grown over the table, climbing round and entwining plates and goblets as brambles entwine a fence, until, all mixed in one great mat of hair, they flowed over the edge and down to the floor. And from their heads the hair hung over the backs of their chairs so that they were wholly hidden. In fact the three men were nearly all hair.
"Dead?" said Caspian.
"I think not, Sire," said Reepicheep, lifting one of their hands out of its tangle of hair in his two paws. "This one is warm and his pulse beats."
"This one, too, and this," said Drinian.
"Why, they're only asleep," said Eustace.
"It's been a long sleep, though," said Edmund, "to let their hair grow like this."
"It must be an enchanted sleep," said Lucy. "I felt the moment we landed on this island that it was full of magic. Oh! do you think we have perhaps come here to break it?"
"We can try," said Caspian, and began shaking the nearest of the three sleepers. For a moment everyone thought he was going to be successful, for the man breathed hard and muttered, "I'll go eastward no more. Out oars for Narnia." But he sank back almost at once into a yet deeper sleep than before: that is, his heavy head sagged a few inches lower towards the table and all efforts to rouse him again were useless. With the second it was much the same. "Weren't born to live like animals. Get to the east while you've a chance—lands behind the sun," and sank down. And the third only said, "Mustard, please," and slept hard.
"Out oars for Narnia, eh?" said Drinian.
"Yes," said Caspian, "you are right, Drinian. I think our quest is at an end. Let's look at their rings. Yes, these are their devices. This is the Lord Revilian. This is the Lord Argoz: and this, the Lord Mavramorn."
"But we can't wake them," said Lucy. "What are we to do?"
"Begging your Majesties' pardons all," said Rhince, "but why not fall to while you're discussing it? We don't see a dinner like this every day."
"Not for your life!" said Caspian.
"That's right, that's right," said several of the sailors. "Too much magic about here. The sooner we're back on board the better."
"Depend upon it," said Reepicheep, "it was from eating this food that these three lords came by a seven years' sleep."
"I wouldn't touch it to save my life," said Drinian.
"The light's going uncommon quick," said Rynelf.
"Back to ship, back to ship," muttered the men.
"I really think," said Edmund, "they're right. We can decide what to do with the three sleepers to-morrow. We daren't eat the food and there's no point in staying here for the night. The whole place smells of magic—and danger."
"I am entirely of King Edmund's opinion," said Reepicheep, "as far as concerns the ship's company in general. But I myself will sit at this table till sunrise."
"Why on earth?" said Eustace.
"Because," said the Mouse, "this is a very great adventure, and no danger seems to me so great as that of knowing when I get back to Narnia that I left a mystery behind me through fear."
"I'll stay with you, Reep," said Edmund.
"And I too," said Caspian.
"And me," said Lucy. And then Eustace volunteered also. This was very brave of him because never having read of such things or even heard of them till he joined the Dawn Treader made it worse for him than for the others.
"I beseech your Majesty——" began Drinian.
"No, my Lord," said Caspian. "Your place is with the ship, and you have had a day's work while we five have idled." There was a lot of argument about this but in the end Caspian had his way. As the crew marched off to the shore in the gathering dusk none of the five watchers, except perhaps Reepicheep, could avoid a cold feeling in the stomach.
They took some time choosing their seats at the perilous table. Probably everyone had the same reason but no one said it out loud. For it was really a rather nasty choice. One could hardly bear to sit all night next to those three terrible hairy objects which, if not dead, were certainly not alive in the ordinary sense. On the other hand, to sit at the far end, so that you would see them less and less as the night grew darker, and wouldn't know if they were moving, and perhaps wouldn't see them at all by about two o'clock—no, it was not to be thought of. So they sauntered round and round the table saying, "What about here?" and "Or perhaps a bit further on", or, "Why not on this side?" till at last they settled down somewhere about the middle but nearer to the sleepers than to the other end. It was about ten by now and almost dark. Those strange new constellations burned in the east. Lucy would have liked it better if they had been the Leopard and the Ship and other old friends of the Narnian sky.
They wrapped themselves in their sea cloaks and sat still and waited. At first there was some attempt at talk but it didn't come to much. And they sat and sat. And all the time they heard the waves breaking on the beach.
After hours that seemed like ages there came a moment when they all knew they had been dozing a moment before but were all suddenly wide awake. The stars were all in quite different positions from those they had last noticed. The sky was very black except for the faintest possible greyness in the east. They were cold, though thirsty, and stiff. And none of them spoke because now at last something was happening.
Before them, beyond the pillars, there was the slope of a low hill. And now a door opened in the hillside, and light appeared in the doorway, and a figure came out, and the door shut behind it. The figure carried a light, and this light was really all that they could see distinctly. It came slowly nearer and nearer till at last it stood right at the table opposite to them. Now they could see that it was a tall girl, dressed in a single long garment of clear blue which left her arms bare. She was bareheaded and her yellow hair hung down her back. And when they looked at her they thought they had never before known what beauty meant.
The light which she had been carrying was a tall candle in a silver candlestick which she now set upon the table. If there had been any wind off the sea earlier in the night it must have died down by now, for the flame of the candle burned as straight and still as if it were in a room with the windows shut and the curtains drawn. Gold and silver on the table shone in its light.
Lucy now noticed something lying lengthwise on the table which had escaped her attention before. It was a knife of stone, sharp as steel, a cruel-looking, ancient-looking thing.
No one had yet spoken a word. Then—Reepicheep first, and Caspian next—they all rose to their feet, because they felt that she was a great lady.
"Travellers who have come from far to Aslan's table," said the girl. "Why do you not eat and drink?"
"Madam," said Caspian, "we feared the food because we thought it had cast our friends into an enchanted sleep."
"They have never tasted it," she said.
"Please," said Lucy, "what happened to them?"
"Seven years ago," said the girl, "they came here in a ship whose sails were rags and her timbers ready to fall apart. There were a few others with them, sailors, and when they came to this table one said, 'Here is the good place. Let us set sail and reef sail and row no longer but sit down and end our days in peace!' And the second said, 'No, let us re-embark and sail for Narnia and the west; it may be that Miraz is dead.' But the third, who was a very masterful man, leaped up and said, 'No, by heaven. We are men and Telmarines, not brutes. What should we do but seek, adventure after adventure? We have not long to live in any event. Let us spend what is left in seeking the unpeopled world behind the sunrise.' And as they quarrelled he caught up the Knife of Stone which lies there on the table and would have fought with his comrades. But it is a thing not right for him to touch. And as his fingers closed upon the hilt, deep sleep fell upon all the three. And till the enchantment is undone they will never wake."
"What is this Knife of Stone?" asked Eustace.
"Do none of you know it?" said the girl.
"I—I think," said Lucy, "I've seen something like it before. It was a knife like it that the White Witch used when she killed Aslan at the Stone Table long ago."
"It was the same," said the girl, "and it was brought here to be kept in honour while the world lasts."
Edmund, who had been looking more and more uncomfortable for the last few minutes, now spoke.
"Look here," he said, "I hope I'm not a coward—about eating this food, I mean—and I'm sure I don't mean to be rude. But we have had a lot of queer adventures on this voyage of ours and things aren't always what they seem. When I look in your face I can't help believing all you say: but then that's just what might happen with a witch too. How are we to know you're a friend?"
"You can't know," said the girl. "You can only believe—or not."
After a moment's pause Reepicheep's small voice was heard.
"Sire," he said to Caspian, "of your courtesy fill my cup with wine from that flagon: it is too big for me to lift. I will drink to the lady."
Caspian obeyed and the Mouse, standing on the table, held up a golden cup between its tiny paws and said, "Lady, I pledge you." Then it fell to on cold peacock, and in a short while everyone else followed its example. All were very hungry and the meal, if not quite what you wanted for a very early breakfast, was excellent as a very late supper.
"Why is it called Aslan's table?" asked Lucy presently.
"It is set here by his bidding," said the girl, "for those who come so far. Some call this island the World's End, for though you can sail further, this is the beginning of the end."
"But how does the food keep?" asked the practical Eustace.
"It is eaten, and renewed, every day," said the girl. "This you will see."
"And what are we to do about the Sleepers?" asked Caspian. "In the world from which my friends come" (here he nodded at Eustace and the Pevensies) "they have a story of a prince or a king coming to a castle where all the people lay in an enchanted sleep. In that story he could not dissolve the enchantment until he had kissed the Princess."
"But here," said the girl, "it is different. Here he cannot kiss the Princess till he has dissolved the enchantment."
"Then," said Caspian, "in the name of Aslan, show me how to set about that work at once."
"My father will teach you that," said the girl.
"Your father!" said everyone. "Who is he? And where?"
"Look," said the girl, turning round and pointing at the door in the hillside. They could see it more easily now, for while they had been talking the stars had grown fainter and great gaps of white light were appearing in the greyness of the eastern sky.
Slowly the door opened again and out there came a figure as tall and straight as the girl's but not so slender. It carried no light but light seemed to come from it. As it came nearer, Lucy saw that it was like an old man. His silver beard came down to his bare feet in front and his silver hair hung down to his heels behind and his robe appeared to be made from the fleece of silver sheep. He looked so mild and grave that once more all the travellers rose to their feet and stood in silence.
But the old man came on without speaking to the travellers and stood on the other side of the table opposite to his daughter. Then both of them held up their arms before them and turned to face the east. In that position they began to sing. I wish I could write down the song, but no one who was present could remember it. Lucy said afterwards that it was high, almost shrill, but very beautiful, "A cold kind of song, an early morning kind of song." And as they sang, the grey clouds lifted from the eastern sky and the white patches grew bigger and bigger till it was all white, and the sea began to shine like silver. And long afterwards (but those two sang all the time) the east began to turn red and at last, unclouded, the sun came up out of the sea and its long level ray shot down the length of the table on the gold and silver and on the Stone Knife.
Once or twice before, the Narnians had wondered whether the sun at its rising did not look bigger in these seas than it had looked at home. This time they were certain. There was no mistaking it. And the brightness of its ray on the dew and on the table was far beyond any morning brightness they had ever seen. And as Edmund said afterwards, "Though lots of things happened on that trip which sound more exciting, that moment was really the most exciting." For now they knew that they had truly come to the beginning of the End of the World.
Then something seemed to be flying at them out of the very centre of the rising sun: but of course one couldn't look steadily in that direction to make sure. But presently the air became full of voices—voices which took up the same song that the Lady and her Father were singing, but in far wilder tones and in a language which no one knew. And soon after that the owners of these voices could be seen. They were birds, large and white, and they came by hundreds and thousands and alighted on everything; on the grass, and the pavement, on the table, on your shoulders, your hands, and your head, till it looked as if heavy snow had fallen. For, like snow, they not only made everything white but blurred and blunted all shapes. But Lucy, looking out from between the wings of the birds that covered her, saw one bird fly to the Old Man with something in its beak that looked like a little fruit, unless it was a little live coal, which it might have been, for it was too bright to look at. And the bird laid it in the Old Man's mouth.
Then the birds stopped their singing and appeared to be very busy about the table. When they rose from it again everything on the table that could be eaten or drunk had disappeared. These birds rose from their meal in their thousands and hundreds and carried away all the things that could not be eaten or drunk, such as bones, rinds, and shells, and took their flight back to the rising sun. But now, because they were not singing, the whir of their wings seemed to set the whole air a-tremble. And there was the table pecked clean and empty, and the three old Lords of Narnia still fast asleep.
Now at last the Old Man turned to the travellers and bade them welcome.
"Sir," said Caspian, "will you tell us how to undo the enchantment which holds these three Narnian Lords asleep."
"I will gladly tell you that, my son," said the Old Man. "To break this enchantment you must sail to the World's End, or as near as you can come to it, and you must come back having left at least one of your company behind."
"And what is to happen to that one?" asked Reepicheep.
"He must go on into the utter east and never return into the world."
"That is my heart's desire," said Reepicheep.
"And are we near the World's End now, Sir?" asked Caspian. "Have you any knowledge of the seas and lands farther east than this?"
"I saw them long ago," said the Old Man, "but it was from a great height. I cannot tell you such things as sailors need to know."
"Do you mean you were flying in the air?" Eustace blurted out.
"I was a long way above the air, my son," replied the Old Man. "I am Ramandu. But I see that you stare at one another and have not heard this name. And no wonder, for the days when I was a star had ceased long before any of you knew this world, and all the constellations have changed."
"Golly," said Edmund under his breath. "He's a retired star."
"Aren't you a star any longer?" asked Lucy.
"I am a star at rest, my daughter," answered Ramandu. "When I set for the last time, decrepit and old beyond all that you can reckon, I was carried to this island. I am not so old now as I was then. Every morning a bird brings me a fire-berry from the valleys in the Sun, and each fire-berry takes away a little of my age. And when I have become as young as the child that was born yesterday, then I shall take my rising again (for we are at earth's eastern rim) and once more tread the great dance."
"In our world," said Eustace, "a star is a huge ball of flaming gas."
"Even in your world, my son, that is not what a star is but only what it is made of. And in this world you have already met a star: for I think you have been with Koriakin."
"Is he a retired star, too?" said Lucy.
"Well, not quite the same," said Ramandu. "It was not quite as a rest that he was set to govern the Duffers. You might call it a punishment. He might have shone for thousands of years more in the southern winter sky if all had gone well."
"What did he do, Sir?" asked Caspian.
"My son," said Ramandu, "it is not for you, a son of Adam, to know what faults a star can commit. But come, we waste time in such talk. Are you yet resolved? Will you sail farther east and come again, leaving one to return no more, and so break the enchantment? Or will you sail westward?"
"Surely, Sire," said Reepicheep, "there is no question about that? It is very plainly part of our quest to rescue these three lords from enchantment."
"I think the same, Reepicheep," replied Caspian. "And even if it were not so, it would break my heart not to go as near the World's End as the Dawn Treader will take us. But I am thinking of the crew. They signed on to seek the seven lords, not to reach the rim of the Earth. If we sail east from here we sail to find the edge, the utter east. And no one knows how far it is. They're brave fellows, but I see signs that some of them are weary of the voyage and long to have our prow pointing to Narnia again. I don't think I should take them farther without their knowledge and consent. And then there's the poor Lord Rhoop. He's a broken man."
"My son," said the star, "it would be no use, even though you wished it, to sail for the World's End with men unwilling or men deceived. That is not how great unenchantments are achieved. They must know where they go and why. But who is this broken man you speak of?"
Caspian told Ramandu the story of Rhoop.
"I can give him what he needs most," said Ramandu. "In this island there is sleep without stint or measure, and sleep in which no faintest footfall of a dream was ever heard. Let him sit beside these other three and drink oblivion till your return."
"Oh, do let's do that, Caspian," said Lucy. "I'm sure it's just what he would love."
At that moment they were interrupted by the sound of many feet and voices: Drinian and the rest of the ship's company were approaching. They halted in surprise when they saw Ramandu and his daughter; and then, because these were obviously great people, every man uncovered his head. Some sailors eyed the empty dishes and flagons on the table with regret.
"My lord," said the King to Drinian, "pray send two men back to the Dawn Treader with a message to the Lord Rhoop. Tell him that the last of his old shipmates are here asleep—a sleep without dreams—and that he can share it."
When this had been done, Caspian told the rest to sit down and laid the whole situation before them. When he had finished there was a long silence and some whispering until presently the Master Bowman got to his feet, and said:
"What some of us have been wanting to ask for a long time, your Majesty, is how we're ever to get home when we do turn, whether we turn here or somewhere else. It's been west and north-west winds all the way, barring an occasional calm. And if that doesn't change, I'd like to know what hopes we have of seeing Narnia again. There's not much chance of supplies lasting while we row all that way."
"That's landsman's talk," said Drinian. "There's always a prevailing west wind in these seas all through the late summer, and it always changes after the new year. We'll have plenty of wind for sailing westward; more than we shall like from all accounts."
"That's true, Master," said an old sailor who was a Galmian by birth. "You get some ugly weather rolling up from the east in January and February. And by your leave, Sir, if I was in command of this ship I'd say to winter here and begin the voyage home in March."
"What'd you eat while you were wintering here?" asked Eustace.
"This table," said Ramandu, "will be filled with a king's feast every day at sunset."
"Now you're talking!" said several sailors.
"Your Majesties and gentlemen and ladies all," said Rynelf, "there's just one thing I want to say. There's not one of us chaps as was pressed on this journey. We're volunteers. And there's some here that are looking very hard at that table and thinking about king's feasts who were talking very loud about adventures on the day we sailed from Cair Paravel, and swearing they wouldn't come home till we'd found the end of the world. And there were some standing on the quay who would have given all they had to come with us. It was thought a finer thing then to have a cabin-boy's berth on the Dawn Treader than to wear a knight's belt. I don't know if you get the hang of what I'm saying. But what I mean is that I think chaps who set out like us will look as silly as—as those Dufflepuds—if we come home and say we got to the beginning of the world's end and hadn't the heart to go farther."
Some of the sailors cheered at this but some said that that was all very well.
"This isn't going to be much fun," whispered Edmund to Caspian. "What are we to do if half those fellows hang back?"
"Wait," Caspian whispered back. "I've still a card to play."
"Aren't you going to say anything, Reep?" whispered Lucy.
"No. Why should your Majesty expect it?" answered Reepicheep in a voice that most people heard. "My own plans are made. While I can, I sail east in the Dawn Treader. When she fails me, I paddle east in my coracle. When she sinks, I shall swim east with my four paws. And when I can swim no longer, if I have not reached Aslan's country, or shot over the edge of the world in some vast cataract, I shall sink with my nose to the sunrise and Peepiceek will be head of the talking mice in Narnia."
"Hear, hear," said a sailor, "I'll say the same, barring the bit about the coracle, which wouldn't bear me." He added in a lower voice, "I'm not going to be outdone by a mouse."
At this point Caspian jumped to his feet. "Friends," he said, "I think you have not quite understood our purpose. You talk as if we had come to you with our hat in our hand, begging for shipmates. It isn't like that at all. We and our royal brother and sister and their kinsman and Sir Reepicheep, the good knight, and the Lord Drinian have an errand to the world's edge. It is our pleasure to choose from among such of you as are willing those whom we deem worthy of so high an enterprise. We have not said that any can come for the asking. That is why we shall now command the Lord Drinian and Master Rhince to consider carefully what men among you are the hardest in battle, the most skilled seamen, the purest in blood, the most loyal to our person, and the cleanest of life and manners; and to give their names to us in a schedule." He paused and went on in a quicker voice, "Aslan's mane!" he exclaimed. "Do you think that the privilege of seeing the last things is to be bought for a song? Why, every man that comes with us shall bequeath the title of Dawn Treader to all his descendants and when we land at Cair Paravel on the homeward voyage he shall have either gold or land enough to make him rich all his life. Now—scatter over the island, all of you. In half an hour's time I shall receive the names that Lord Drinian brings me."
There was rather a sheepish silence and then the crew made their bows and moved away, one in this direction and one in that, but mostly in little knots or bunches, talking.
"And now for the Lord Rhoop," said Caspian.
But turning to the head of the table he saw that Rhoop was already there. He had arrived, silent and unnoticed, while the discussion was going on, and was seated beside the Lord Argoz. The daughter of Ramandu stood beside him as if she had just helped him into his chair; Ramandu stood behind him and laid both his hands on Rhoop's grey head. Even in daylight a faint silver light came from the hands of the star. There was a smile on Rhoop's haggard face. He held out one of his hands to Lucy and the other to Caspian. For a moment it looked as if he were going to say something. Then his smile brightened as if he were feeling some delicious sensation, a long sigh of contentment came from his lips, his head fell forward, and he slept.
"Poor Rhoop," said Lucy. "I am glad. He must have had terrible times."
"Don't let's even think of it," said Eustace.
Meanwhile Caspian's speech, helped perhaps by some magic of the island, was having just the effect he intended. A good many who had been anxious enough to get out of the voyage felt quite differently about being left out of it. And of course whenever any one sailor announced that he had made up his mind to ask for permission to sail, the ones who hadn't said this felt that they were getting fewer and more uncomfortable. So that before the half-hour was nearly over several people were positively "sucking up" to Drinian and Rhince (at least that was what they called it at my school) to get a good report. And soon there were only three left who didn't want to go, and those three were trying very hard to persuade others to stay with them. And very shortly after that there was only one left. And in the end he began to be afraid of being left behind all on his own and changed his mind.
At the end of the half-hour they all came trooping back to Aslan's Table and stood at one end while Drinian and Rhince went and sat down with Caspian and made their report; and Caspian accepted all the men but that one who had changed his mind at the last moment. His name was Pittencream and he stayed on the Island of the Star all the time the others were away looking for the World's End, and he very much wished he had gone with them. He wasn't the sort of man who could enjoy talking to Ramandu and Ramandu's daughter (nor they to him), and it rained a good deal, and though there was a wonderful feast on the Table every night, he didn't very much enjoy it. He said it gave him the creeps sitting there alone (and in the rain as likely as not) with those four Lords asleep at the end of the Table. And when the others returned he felt so out of things that he deserted on the voyage home at the Lone Islands, and went and lived in Calormen, where he told wonderful stories about his adventures at the End of the World, until at last he came to believe them himself. So you may say, in a sense, that he lived happily ever after. But he could never bear mice.
That night they all ate and drank together at the great Table between the pillars where the feast was magically renewed: and next morning the Dawn Treader set sail once more just when the great birds had come and gone again.
"Lady," said Caspian, "I hope to speak with you again when I have broken the enchantments." And Ramandu's daughter looked at him and smiled.
Very soon after they had left Ramandu's country they began to feel that they had already sailed beyond the world. All was different. For one thing they all found that they were needing less sleep. One did not want to go to bed nor to eat much, nor even to talk except in low voices. Another thing was the light. There was too much of it. The sun when it came up each morning looked twice, if not three times, its usual size. And every morning (which gave Lucy the strangest feeling of all) the huge white birds, singing their song with human voices in a language no one knew, streamed overhead and vanished astern on their way to their breakfast at Aslan's Table. A little later they came flying back and vanished into the east.
"How beautifully clear the water is!" said Lucy to herself, as she leaned over the port side early in the afternoon of the second day.
And it was. The first thing that she noticed was a little black object, about the size of a shoe, travelling along at the same speed as the ship. For a moment she thought it was something floating on the surface. But then there came floating past a bit of stale bread which the cook had just thrown out of the galley. And the bit of bread looked as if it were going to collide with the black thing, but it didn't. It passed above it, and Lucy now saw that the black thing could not be on the surface. Then the black thing suddenly got very much bigger and flicked back to normal size a moment later.
Now Lucy knew she had seen something just like that happen somewhere else—if only she could remember where. She held her hand to her head and screwed up her face and put out her tongue in the effort to remember. At last she did. Of course! It was like what you saw from a train on a bright sunny day. You saw the black shadow of your own coach running along the fields at the same pace as the train. Then you went into a cutting; and immediately the same shadow flicked close up to you and got big, racing along the grass of the cutting-bank. Then you came out of the cutting and—flick!—once more the black shadow had gone back to its normal size and was running along the fields.
"It's our shadow!—the shadow of the Dawn Treader" said Lucy. "Our shadow running along on the bottom of the sea. That time when it got bigger it went over a hill. But in that case the water must be clearer than I thought! Good gracious, I must be seeing the bottom of the sea; fathoms and fathoms down."
As soon as she had said this she realised that the great silvery expanse which she had been seeing (without noticing) for some time was really the sand on the sea-bed and that all sorts of darker or brighter patches were not lights and shadows on the surface but real things on the bottom. At present, for instance, they were passing over a mass of soft purply green with a broad, winding strip of pale grey in the middle of it. But now that she knew it was on the bottom she saw it much better. She could see that bits of the dark stuff were much higher than other bits and were waving gently. "Just like trees in a wind," said Lucy. "And I do believe that's what they are. It's a submarine forest."
They passed on above it and presently the pale streak was joined by another pale streak. "If I was down there," thought Lucy, "that streak would be just like a road through the wood. And that place where it joins the other would be a crossroads. Oh, I do wish I was. Hallo! the forest is coming to an end. And I do believe the streak really was a road! I can still see it going on across the open sand. It's a different colour. And it's marked out with something at the edges—dotted lines. Perhaps they are stones. And now it's getting wider."
But it was not really getting wider, it was getting nearer. She realised this because of the way in which the shadow of the ship came rushing up towards her. And the road—she felt sure it was a road now—began to go in zigzags. Obviously it was climbing up a steep hill. And when she held her head sideways and looked back, what she saw was very like what you see when you look down a winding road from the top of a hill. She could even see the shafts of sunlight falling through the deep water on to the wooded valley; and, in the extreme distance, everything melting away into a dim greenness. But some places—the sunny ones, she thought—were ultramarine blue.
She could not, however, spend much time looking back; what was coming into view in the forward direction was too exciting. The road had apparently now reached the top of the hill and ran straight forward. Little specks were moving to and fro on it. And now something most wonderful, fortunately in full sunlight—or as full as it can be when it falls through fathoms of water—flashed into sight. It was knobbly and jagged and of a pearly, or perhaps an ivory, colour. She was so nearly straight above it that at first she could hardly make out what it was. But everything became plain when she noticed its shadow. The sunlight was falling across Lucy's shoulders, so the shadow of the thing lay stretched out on the sand behind it. And by its shape she saw clearly that it was a shadow of towers and pinnacles, minarets and domes.
"Why!—it's a city or a huge castle," said Lucy to herself. "But I wonder why they've built it on top of a high mountain?"
Long afterwards when she was back in England and talked all these adventures over with Edmund, they thought of a reason and I am pretty sure it is the true one. In the sea, the deeper you go, the darker and colder it gets, and it is down there, in the dark and cold, that dangerous things live—the squid and the Sea Serpent and the Kraken. The valleys are the wild, unfriendly places. The sea-people feel about their valleys as we do about mountains, and feel about their mountains as we feel about valleys. It is on the heights (or, as we would say, "in the shallows") that there is warmth and peace. The reckless hunters and brave knights of the sea go down into the depths on quests and adventures, but return home to the heights for rest and peace, courtesy and council, the sports, the dances and the songs.
They had passed the city and the sea-bed was still rising. It was only a few hundred feet below the ship now. The road had disappeared. They were sailing above an open park-like country, dotted with little groves of brightly coloured vegetation. And then—Lucy nearly squealed aloud with excitement—she had seen People.
There were between fifteen and twenty of them, and all mounted on sea-horses—not the tiny little sea-horses which you may have seen in museums but horses rather bigger than themselves. They must be noble and lordly people, Lucy thought, for she could catch the gleam of gold on some of their foreheads and streamers of emerald or orange coloured stuff fluttered from their shoulders in the current. Then:
"Oh, bother these fish!" said Lucy, for a whole shoal of small fat fish, swimming quite close to the surface, had come between her and the Sea People. But though this spoiled her view it led to the most interesting thing of all. Suddenly a fierce little fish of a kind she had never seen before came darting up from below, snapped, grabbed, and sank rapidly with one of the fat fish in its mouth. And all the Sea People were sitting on their horses staring up at what had happened. They seemed to be talking and laughing. And before the hunting fish had got back to them with its prey, another of the same kind came up from the Sea People. And Lucy was almost certain that one big Sea Man who sat on his sea-horse in the middle of the party had sent it or released it; as if he had been holding it back till then in his hand or on his wrist.
"Why, I do declare," said Lucy, "it's a hunting party. Or more like a hawking party. Yes, that's it. They ride out with these little fierce fish on their wrists just as we used to ride out with falcons on our wrists when we were Kings and Queens at Cair Paravel long ago. And then they fly them—or I suppose I should say swim them—at the others. How——"
She stopped suddenly because the scene was changing. The Sea People had noticed the Dawn Treader. The shoal of fish had scattered in every direction: the People themselves were coming up to find out the meaning of this big, black thing which had come between them and the sun. And now they were so close to the surface that if they had been in air, instead of water, Lucy could have spoken to them. There were men and women both. All wore coronets of some kind and many had chains of pearls. They wore no other clothes. Their bodies were the colour of old ivory, their hair dark purple. The King in the centre (no one could mistake him for anything but the king) looked proudly and fiercely into Lucy's face and shook a spear in his hand. His knights did the same. The faces of the ladies were filled with astonishment. Lucy felt sure they had never seen a ship or a human before—and how should they, in seas beyond the world's end where no ship ever came?
"What are you staring at, Lu?" said a voice close beside her.
Lucy had been so absorbed in what she was seeing that she started at the sound, and when she turned she found that her arm had gone "dead" from leaning so long on the rail in one position. Drinian and Edmund were beside her.
"Look," she said.
They both looked, but almost at once Drinian said in a low voice:
"Turn round at once, your Majesties—that's right, with our backs to the sea. And don't look as if we were talking about anything important."
"Why, what's the matter?" said Lucy as she obeyed.
"It'll never do for the sailors to see all that," said Drinian. "We'll have men falling in love with a sea-woman, or falling in love with the under-sea country itself, and jumping overboard. I've heard of that kind of thing happening before in strange seas. It's always unlucky to see these people."
"But we used to know them," said Lucy. "In the old days at Cair Paravel when my brother Peter was High King. They came to the surface and sang at our coronation."
"I think that must have been a different kind, Lu," said Edmund. "They could live in the air as well as under water. I rather think these can't. By the look of them they'd have surfaced and started attacking us long ago if they could. They seem very fierce."
"At any rate," began Drinian, but at that moment two sounds were heard. One was a plop. The other was a voice from the fighting-top shouting, "Man overboard!" Then everyone was busy. Some of the sailors hurried aloft to take in the sail: others hurried below to get to the oars; and Rhince, who was on duty on the poop, began to put the helm hard over so as to come round and back to the man who had gone overboard. But by now everyone knew that it wasn't strictly a man. It was Reepicheep.
"Drat that mouse!" said Drinian. "It's more trouble than all the rest of the ship's company put together. If there is any scrape to be got into, in it will get! It ought to be put in irons—keel-hauled—marooned—have its whiskers cut off. Can any one see the little blighter?"
All this didn't mean that Drinian really disliked Reepicheep. On the contrary he liked him very much and was therefore frightened about him, and being frightened put him in a bad temper—just as your mother is much angrier with you for running out into the road in front of a car than a stranger would be. No one, of course, was afraid of Reepicheep's drowning, for he was an excellent swimmer; but the three who knew what was going on below the water were afraid of those long, cruel spears in the hands of the Sea People.
In a few minutes the Dawn Treader had come round and every one could see the black blob in the water which was Reepicheep. He was chattering with the greatest excitement but as his mouth kept on getting filled with water nobody could understand what he was saying.
"He'll blurt the whole thing out if we don't shut him up," cried Drinian. To prevent this he rushed to the side and lowered a rope himself, shouting to the sailors, "All right, all right. Back to your places. I hope I can heave a mouse up without help." And as Reepicheep began climbing up the rope—not very nimbly because his wet fur made him heavy—Drinian leaned over and whispered to him,
"Don't tell. Not a word."
But when the dripping Mouse had reached the deck it turned out not to be at all interested in the Sea People.
"Sweet!" he cheeped. "Sweet, sweet!"
"What are you talking about?" asked Drinian crossly. "And you needn't shake yourself all over me, either."
"I tell you the water's sweet," said the Mouse. "Sweet, fresh. It isn't salt."
For a moment no one quite took in the importance of this. But then Reepicheep once more repeated the old prophecy:
"Where the waves grow sweet,
Doubt not, Reepicheep,
There is the utter East."
Then at last everyone understood.
"Let me have a bucket, Rynelf," said Drinian.
It was handed him and he lowered it and up it came again. The water shone in it like glass.
"Perhaps your Majesty would like to taste it first," said Drinian to Caspian.
The King took the bucket in both hands, raised it to his lips, sipped, then drank deeply and raised his head. His face was changed. Not only his eyes but everything about him seemed to be brighter.
"Yes," he said, "it is sweet. That's real water, that. I'm not sure that it isn't going to kill me. But it is the death I would have chosen—if I'd known about it till now."
"What do you mean?" asked Edmund.
"It—it's like light more than anything else," said Caspian.
"That is what it is," said Reepicheep. "Drinkable light. We must be very near the end of the world now."
There was a moment's silence and then Lucy knelt down on the deck and drank from the bucket.
"It's the loveliest thing I have ever tasted," she said with a kind of gasp. "But oh—it's strong. We shan't need to eat anything now."
And one by one everybody on board drank. And for a long time they were all silent. They felt almost too well and strong to bear it; and presently they began to notice another result. As I have said before, there had been too much light ever since they left the island of Ramandu—the sun too large (though not too hot), the sea too bright, the air too shining. Now, the light grew no less—if anything, it increased—but they could bear it. They could look straight up at the sun without blinking. They could see more light than they had ever seen before. And the deck and the sail and their own faces and bodies became brighter and brighter and every rope shone. And next morning, when the sun rose, now five or six times its old size, they stared hard into it and could see the very feathers of the birds that came flying from it.
Hardly a word was spoken on board all that day, till about dinner-time (no one wanted any dinner, the water was enough for them) Drinian said:
"I can't understand this. There is not a breath of wind. The sail hangs dead. The sea is as flat as a pond. And yet we drive on as fast as if there were a gale behind us."
"I've been thinking that, too," said Caspian. "We must be caught in some strong current."
"H'm," said Edmund. "That's not so nice if the World really has an edge and we're getting near it."
"You mean," said Caspian, "that we might be just—well, poured over it?"
"Yes, yes," cried Reepicheep, clapping his paws together. "That's how I've always imagined it—the World like a great round table and the waters of all the oceans endlessly pouring over the edge. The ship will tip up—stand on her head—for one moment we shall see over the edge—and then, down, down, the rush, the speed——"
"And what do you think will be waiting for us at the bottom, eh?" said Drinian.
"Aslan's country perhaps," said the Mouse, its eyes shining. "Or perhaps there isn't any bottom. Perhaps it goes down for ever and ever. But whatever it is, won't it be worth anything just to have looked for one moment beyond the edge of the world."
"But look here," said Eustace, "this is all rot. The world's round—I mean, round like a ball, not like a table."
"Our world is," said Edmund. "But is this?"
"Do you mean to say," asked Caspian, "that you three come from a round world (round like a ball) and you've never told me! It's really too bad of you. Because we have fairy-tales in which there are round worlds and I always loved them. I never believed there were any real ones. But I've always wished there were and I've always longed to live in one. Oh, I'd give anything—I wonder why you can get into our world and we never get into yours? If only I had the chance! It must be exciting to live on a thing like a ball. Have you ever been to the parts where people walk about upside-down?"
Edmund shook his head. "And it isn't like that," he added. "There's nothing particularly exciting about a round world when you're there."
Reepicheep was the only person on board besides Drinian and the two Pevensies who had noticed the Sea People. He had dived in at once when he saw the Sea King shaking his spear, for he regarded this as a sort of threat or challenge and wanted to have the matter out there and then. The excitement of discovering that the water was now fresh had distracted his attention, and before he remembered the Sea People again Lucy and Drinian had taken him aside and warned him not to mention what he had seen.
As things turned out they need hardly have bothered, for by this time the Dawn Treader was gliding over a part of the sea which seemed to be uninhabited. No one except Lucy saw anything more of the People and even she had only one short glimpse. All morning on the following day they sailed in fairly shallow water and the bottom was weedy. Just before midday Lucy saw a large shoal of fishes grazing on the weed. They were all eating steadily and all moving in the same direction. "Just like a flock of sheep," thought Lucy. Suddenly she saw a little Sea Girl of about her own age in the middle of them—a quiet, lonely-looking girl with a sort of crook in her hand. Lucy felt sure that this girl must be a shepherdess—or perhaps a fish-herdess—and that the shoal was really a flock at pasture. Both the fishes and the girl were quite close to the surface. And just as the girl, gliding in the shallow water, and Lucy, leaning over the bulwark, came opposite to one another, the girl looked up and stared straight into Lucy's face. Neither could speak to the other and in a moment the Sea Girl dropped astern. But Lucy will never forget her face. It did not look frightened or angry like those of the other Sea People. Lucy had liked that girl and she felt certain the girl had liked her. In that one moment they had somehow become friends. There does not seem to be much chance of their meeting again in that world or any other. But if ever they do they will rush together with their hands held out.
After that for many days, without wind in her shrouds or foam at her bows, across a waveless sea, the Dawn Treader glided smoothly east. Every day and every hour the light became more brilliant and still they could bear it. No one ate or slept and no one wanted to, but they drew buckets of dazzling water from the sea, stronger than wine and somehow wetter, more liquid, than ordinary water, and pledged one another silently in deep draughts of it. And one or two of the sailors who had been oldish men when the voyage began now grew younger every day. Everyone on board was filled with joy and excitement, but not an excitement that made one talk. The further they sailed the less they spoke, and then almost in a whisper. The stillness of that last sea laid hold on them.
"My Lord," said Caspian to Drinian one day, "what do you see ahead?"
"Sire," said Drinian, "I see whiteness. All along the horizon from north to south, as far as my eyes can reach."
"That is what I see too," said Caspian, "and I cannot imagine what it is."
"If we were in higher latitudes, your Majesty," said Drinian, "I would say it was ice. But it can't be that; not here. All the same, we'd better get men to the oars and hold the ship back against the current. Whatever the stuff is, we don't want to crash into it at this speed!"
They did as Drinian said, and so continued to go slower and slower. The whiteness did not get any less mysterious as they approached it. If it was land it must be a very strange land, for it seemed just as smooth as the water and on the same level with it. When they got very close to it Drinian put the helm hard over and turned the Dawn Treader south so that she was broadside on to the current and rowed a little way southward along the edge of the whiteness. In so doing they accidentally made the important discovery that the current was only about forty feet wide and the rest of the sea as still as a pond. This was good news for the crew, who had already begun to think that the return journey to Ramandu's land, rowing against stream all the way, would be pretty poor sport. (It also explained why the shepherd girl had dropped so quickly astern. She was not in the current. If she had been she would have been moving east at the same speed as the ship.)
And still no one could make out what the white stuff was. Then the boat was lowered and it put off to investigate. Those who remained on the Dawn Treader could see that the boat pushed right in amidst the whiteness. Then they could hear the voices of the party in the boat (clear across the still water) talking in a shrill and surprised way. Then there was a pause while Rynelf in the bows of the boat took a sounding; and when, after that, the boat came rowing back there seemed to be plenty of the white stuff inside her. Everyone crowded to the side to hear the news.
"Lilies, your Majesty!" shouted Rynelf, standing up in the bows.
"What did you say?" asked Caspian.
"Blooming lilies, your Majesty," said Rynelf. "Same as in a pool in a garden at home."
"Look!" said Lucy, who was in the stern of the boat. She held up her wet arms full of white petals and broad flat leaves.
"What's the depth, Rynelf?" asked Drinian.
"That's the funny thing, Captain," said Rynelf. "It's still deep. Three and a half fathoms clear."
"They can't be real lilies—not what we call lilies," said Eustace.
Probably they were not, but they were very like them. And when, after some consultation, the Dawn Treader turned back into the current and began to glide eastward through the Lily Lake or the Silver Sea (they tried both these names but it was the Silver Sea that stuck and is now on Caspian's map) the strangest part of their travels began. Very soon the open sea which they were leaving was only a thin rim of blue on the western horizon. Whiteness, shot with faintest colour of gold, spread round them on every side, except just astern where their passage had thrust the lilies apart and left an open lane of water that shone like dark green glass. To look at, this last sea was very like the Arctic; and if their eyes had not by now grown as strong as eagles' the sun on all that whiteness—especially at early morning when the sun was hugest—would have been unbearable. And every evening the same whiteness made the daylight last longer. There seemed no end to the lilies. Day after day from all those miles and leagues of flowers there rose a smell which Lucy found it very hard to describe; sweet—yes, but not at all sleepy or overpowering, a fresh, wild, lonely smell that seemed to get into your brain and make you feel that you could go up mountains at a run or wrestle with an elephant. She and Caspian said to one another, "I feel that I can't stand much more of this, yet I don't want it to stop."
They took soundings very often but it was only several days later that the water became shallower. After that it went on getting shallower. There came a day when they had to row out of the current and feel their way forward at a snail's pace, rowing. And soon it was clear that the Dawn Treader could sail no further east. Indeed it was only by very clever handling that they saved her from grounding.
"Lower the boat," cried Caspian, "and then call the men aft. I must speak to them."
"What's he going to do?" whispered Eustace to Edmund. "There's a queer look in his eyes."
"I think we probably all look the same," said Edmund.
They joined Caspian on the poop and soon all the men were crowded together at the foot of the ladder to hear the King's speech.
"Friends," said Caspian, "we have now fulfilled the quest on which you embarked. The seven lords are all accounted for and as Sir Reepicheep has sworn never to return, when you reach Ramandu's Land you will doubtless find the Lords Revilian and Argoz and Mavramorn awake. To you, my Lord Drinian, I entrust this ship, bidding you sail to Narnia with all the speed you may, and above all not to land on the Island of Deathwater. And instruct my regent, the Dwarf Trumpkin, to give to all these, my shipmates, the rewards I promised them. They have been earned well. And if I come not again it is my will that the Regent, and Master Cornelius, and Trufflehunter the Badger, and the Lord Drinian choose a King of Narnia with the consent—
"But, Sire," interrupted Drinian, "are you abdicating?"
"I am going with Reepicheep to see the World's End," said Caspian.
A low murmur of dismay ran through the sailors.
"We will take the boat," said Caspian. "You will have no need of it in these gentle seas and you must build a new one in Ramandu's island. And now——"
"Caspian," said Edmund suddenly and sternly, "you can't do this."
"Most certainly," said Reepicheep, "his Majesty cannot."
"No indeed," said Drinian.
"Can't?" said Caspian sharply, looking for a moment not unlike his uncle Miraz.
"Begging your Majesty's pardon," said Rynelf from the deck below, "but if one of us did the same it would be called deserting."
"You presume too much on your long service, Rynelf," said Caspian.
"No, Sire! He's perfectly right," said Drinian.
"By the Mane of Aslan," said Caspian, "I had thought you were all my subjects here, not my schoolmasters."
"I'm not," said Edmund, "and I say you can not do this."
"Can't again," said Caspian. "What do you mean?"
"If it please your Majesty, we mean shall not," said Reepicheep with a very low bow. "You are the King of Narnia. You break faith with all your subjects, and especially with Trumpkin, if you do not return. You shall not please yourself with adventures as if you were a private person. And if your Majesty will not hear reason it will be the truest loyalty of every man on board to follow me in disarming and binding you till you come to your senses."
"Quite right," said Edmund. "Like they did with Ulysses when he wanted to go near the Sirens."
Caspian's hand had gone to his sword hilt, when Lucy said, "And you've almost promised Ramandu's daughter to go back."
Caspian paused. "Well, yes. There is that," he said. He stood irresolute for a moment and then shouted out to the ship in general.
"Well, have your way. The quest is ended. We all return. Get the boat up again."
"Sire," said Reepicheep, "we do not all return. I, as I explained before——"
"Silence!" thundered Caspian. "I've been lessoned but I'll not be baited. Will no one silence that Mouse?"
"Your Majesty promised," said Reepicheep, "to be good lord to the Talking Beasts of Narnia."
"Talking beasts, yes," said Caspian. "I said nothing about beasts that never stop talking." And he flung down the ladder in a temper and went into the cabin, slamming the door.
But when the others rejoined him a little later they found him changed; he was white and there were tears in his eyes.
"It's no good," he said. "I might as well have behaved decently for all the good I did with my temper and swagger. Aslan has spoken to me. No—I don't mean he was actually here. He wouldn't fit into the cabin, for one thing. But that gold lion's head on the wall came to life and spoke to me. It was terrible—his eyes. Not that he was at all rough with me—only a bit stern at first. But it was terrible all the same. And he said—he said—oh, I can't bear it. The worst thing he could have said. You're to go on—Reep and Edmund, and Lucy, and Eustace; and I'm to go back. Alone. And at once. And what is the good of anything?"
"Caspian, dear," said Lucy. "You knew we'd have to go back to our own world sooner or later."
"Yes," said Caspian with a sob, "but this is sooner."
"You'll feel better when you get back to Ramandu's Land," said Lucy.
He cheered up a little later on, but it was a grievous parting on both sides and I will not dwell on it. About two o'clock in the afternoon, well victualled and watered (though they thought they would need neither food nor drink) and with Reepicheep's coracle on board, the boat pulled away from the Dawn Treader to row through the endless carpet of lilies. The Dawn Treader flew all her flags and hung out her shields to honour their departure. Tall and big and homelike she looked from their low position with the lilies all round them. And even before she was out of sight they saw her turn and begin rowing slowly westward. Yet though Lucy shed a few tears she could not feel it as much as you might have expected. The light, the silence, the tingling smell of the Silver Sea, even (in some odd way) the loneliness itself, were too exciting.
There was no need to row, for the current drifted them steadily to the east. None of them slept nor ate. All that night and all next day they glided eastward, and when the third day dawned—with a brightness you or I could not bear even if we had dark glasses on—they saw a wonder ahead. It was as if a wall stood up between them and the sky, a greenish-grey, trembling, shimmering wall. Then up came the sun, and at its first rising they saw it through the wall and it turned into wonderful rainbow colours. Then they knew that the wall was really a long, tall wave—a wave endlessly fixed in one place as you may often see at the edge of a waterfall. It seemed to be about thirty feet high, and the current was gliding them swiftly towards it. You might have supposed they would have thought of their danger. They didn't. I don't think anyone could have in their position. For now they saw something not only behind the wave but behind the sun. They could not have seen even the sun if their eyes had not been strengthened by the water of the Last Sea. But now they could look at the rising sun and see it clearly and see things beyond it. What they saw—eastward, beyond the sun—was a range of mountains. It was so high that either they never saw the top of it or they forgot it. None of them remembers seeing any sky in that direction. And the mountains must really have been outside the world. For any mountains even a quarter or a twentieth of that height ought to have had ice and snow on them. But these were warm and green and full of forests and waterfalls however high you looked. And suddenly there came a breeze from the east, tossing the top of the wave into foamy shapes and ruffling the smooth water all round them. It lasted only a second or so but what it brought them in that second none of those three children will ever forget. It brought both a smell and a sound, a musical sound. Edmund and Eustace would never talk about it afterwards. Lucy could only say, "It would break your heart." "Why," said I, "was it so sad?" "Sad!! No," said Lucy.
No one in that boat doubted that they were seeing beyond the End of the World into Aslan's country.
At that moment, with a crunch, the boat ran aground. The water was too shallow now even for it. "This," said Reepicheep, "is where I go on alone."
They did not even try to stop him, for everything now felt as if it had been fated or had happened before. They helped him to lower his little coracle. Then he took off his sword ("I shall need it no more," he said) and flung it far away across the lilied sea. Where it fell it stood upright with the hilt above the surface. Then he bade them good-bye, trying to be sad for their sakes; but he was quivering with happiness. Lucy, for the first and last time, did what she had always wanted to do, taking him in her arms and caressing him. Then hastily he got into his coracle and took his paddle, and the current caught it and away he went, very black against the lilies. But no lilies grew on the wave; it was a smooth green slope. The coracle went more and more quickly, and beautifully it rushed up the wave's side. For one split second they saw its shape and Reepicheep's on the very top. Then it vanished, and since that moment no one can truly claim to have seen Reepicheep the Mouse. But my belief is that he came safe to Aslan's country and is alive there to this day.
As the sun rose the sight of those mountains outside the world faded away. The wave remained but there was only blue sky behind it.
The children got out of the boat and waded—not towards the wave but southward with the wall of water on their left. They could not have told you why they did this; it was their fate. And though they had felt—and been—very grown up on the Dawn Treader, they now felt just the opposite and held hands as they waded through the lilies. They never felt tired. The water was warm and all the time it got shallower. At last they were on dry sand, and then on grass—a huge plain of very fine short grass, almost level with the Silver Sea and spreading in every direction without so much as a molehill.
And of course, as it always does in a perfectly flat place without trees, it looked as if the sky came down to meet the grass in front of them. But as they went on they got the strangest impression that here at last the sky did really come down and join the earth—a blue wall, very bright, but real and solid: more like glass than anything else. And soon they were quite sure of it. It was very near now.
But between them and the foot of the sky there was something so white on the green grass that even with their eagles' eyes they could hardly look at it. They came on and saw that it was a Lamb.
"Come and have breakfast," said the Lamb in its sweet milky voice.
Then they noticed for the first time that there was a fire lit on the grass and fish roasting on it. They sat down and ate the fish, hungry now for the first time for many days. And it was the most delicious food they had ever tasted.
"Please, Lamb," said Lucy, "is this the way to Aslan's country?"
"Not for you," said the Lamb. "For you the door into Aslan's country is from your own world."
"What!" said Edmund. "Is there a way into Aslan's country from our world too?"
"There is a way into my country from all the worlds," said the Lamb; but as he spoke his snowy white flushed into tawny gold and his size changed and he was Aslan himself, towering above them and scattering light from his mane.
"Oh, Aslan," said Lucy. "Will you tell us how to get into your country from our world?"
"I shall be telling you all the time," said Aslan. "But I will not tell you how long or short the way will be; only that it lies across a river. But do not fear that, for I am the great Bridge Builder. And now come; I will open the door in the sky and send you to your own land."
"Please, Aslan," said Lucy. "Before we go, will you tell us when we can come back to Narnia again? Please. And oh, do, do, do make it soon."
"Dearest," said Aslan very gently, "you and your brother will never come back to Narnia."
"Oh, Aslan!!" said Edmund and Lucy both together in despairing voices.
"You are too old, children," said Aslan, "and you must begin to come close to your own world now."
"It isn't Narnia, you know," sobbed Lucy. "It's OK. We shan't meet you there. And how can we live, never meeting you?"
"But you shall meet me, dear one," said Aslan.
"Are—are you there too, Sir?" said Edmund.
"I am," said Aslan. "But there I have another name. You must learn to know me by that name. This was the very reason why you were brought to Narnia, that by knowing me here for a little, you may know me better there."
"And is Eustace never to come back here either?" said Lucy.
"Child," said Aslan, "do you really need to know that? Come, I am opening the door in the sky." Then all in one moment there was a rending of the blue wall (like a curtain being torn) and a terrible white light from beyond the sky, and the feel of Aslan's mane and a Lion's kiss on their foreheads and then—the back bedroom in Aunt Alberta's home at Cambridge.
Only two more things need to be told. One is that Caspian and his men all came safely back to Ramandu's Island. And the three lords woke from their sleep. Caspian married Ramandu's daughter and they all reached Narnia in the end, and she became a great queen and the mother and grandmother of great kings. The other is that back in our own world everyone soon started saying how Eustace had improved, and how "You'd never know him for the same boy": everyone except Aunt Alberta, who said he had become very commonplace and tiresome and it must have been the influence of those Pevensie children.
THE LAST drops of the thundershower had hardly ceased falling when the Pedestrian stuffed
his map into his pocket, settled his pack more comfortably on his tired shoulders, and stepped
out from the shelter of a large chestnut tree into the middle of the road. A violent yellow sunset
was pouring through a rift in the clouds to westward, but straight ahead over the hills the sky
was the colour of dark slate. Every tree and blade of grass was dripping, and the road shone
like a river. The Pedestrian wasted no time on the landscape but set out at once with the
determined stride of a good walker who has lately realized that he will have to walk farther than
he intended. That, indeed, was his situation. If he had chosen to look back, which he did not,
he could have seen the spire of Much Nadderby, and, seeing it, might have uttered a
malediction on the inhospitable little hotel which, though obviously empty, had refused him a
bed. The place had changed hands since he last went for a walking tour in these parts. The
kindly old landlord on whom he had reckoned had been replaced by someone whom the
barmaid referred to as 'the lady,' and the lady was apparently a British innkeeper of that
orthodox school who regard guests as a nuisance. His only chance now was Sterk, on the far
side of the hills, and a good six miles away. The map marked an inn at Sterk. The Pedestrian
was too experienced to build any very sanguine hopes on this, but there seemed nothing else
within range.
He walked fairly fast, and doggedly, without looking much about him, like a man trying to
shorten the way with some interesting train of thought. He was tall, but a little roundshouldered,
about thirty-five to forty years of age, and dressed with that particular kind of
shabbiness which marks a member of the intelligentsia on a holiday. He might easily have been
mistaken for a doctor or a schoolmaster at first sight, though he had not the man-of-the-world
air of the one or the indefinable breeziness of the other. In fact, he was a philologist, and fellow
of a Cambridge college. His name was Ransom.
He had hoped when he left Nadderby that he might find a night's lodging at some friendly
farm before he had walked as far as Sterk. But the land this side of the hills seemed almost
uninhabited. It was a desolate, featureless sort of country mainly devoted to cabbage and
turnip, with poor hedges and few trees. It attracted no visitors like the richer country south of
Nadderby and it was protected by the hills from the industrial areas beyond Sterk. As the
evening drew in and the noise of the birds came to an end it grew more silent than an English
landscape usually is. The noise of his own feet on the metalled road became irritating.
He had walked thus for a matter of two miles when he became aware of a light ahead. He
was close under the hills by now and it was nearly dark, so that he still cherished hopes of a
substantial farmhouse until he was quite close to the real origin of the light, which proved to be
a very small cottage of ugly nineteenth-century brick. A woman darted out of the open
doorway as he approached it and almost collided with him.
"I beg your pardon, sir," she said. "I thought it was my Harry."
Ransom asked her if there was any place nearer than Sterk where he might possibly get a
bed.
"No, sir," said the woman. "Not nearer than Sterk. I dare say as they might fix you up at
Nadderby."
She spoke in a humbly fretful voice as if her mind were intent on something else. Ransom
explained that he had already tried Nadderby.
"Then I don't know, I'm sure, sir," she replied. "There isn't hardly any house before Sterk,
not what you want. There's only The Rise, where my Harry works, and I thought you was
coming from that way, sir, and that's why I come out when I heard you, thinking it might be
him. He ought to be home this long time."
"The Rise," said Ransom. "What's that? A farm? Would they put me up?"
"Oh no, sir. You see there's no one there now except the Professor and the gentleman from
London, not since Miss Alice died. They wouldn't do anything like that, sir. They don't even
keep any servants, except my Harry for doing the furnace like, and he's not in the house."
"What's this professor's name?" asked Ransom, with a faint hope.
"I don't know, I'm sure, sir," said the woman. "The other gentleman's Mr Devine, he is, and
Harry says the other gentleman is a professor. He don't know much about it, you see, sir, being
a little simple, and that's why I don't like him coming home so late, and they said they'd always
send him home at six o'clock. It isn't as if he didn't do a good day's work, either."
The monotonous voce and the limited range of the woman's vocabulary did not express
much emotion, but Ransom was standing sufficiently near to perceive that she was trembling
and nearly crying. It occurred to him that he ought to call on the mysterious professor and ask
for the boy to be sent home: and it occurred to him just a fraction of a second later that once he
were inside the house - among men of his own profession - he might very reasonably accept the
offer of a night's hospitality. Whatever the process of thought may have been, he found that the
mental picture of himself calling at The Rise had assumed all the solidity of a thing determined
upon. He told the woman what he intended to do.
"Thank you very much, sir, I'm sure," she said. "And if you would be so kind as to see him
out of the gate and on the road before you leave, if you see what I mean, sir. He's that
frightened of the Professor and he wouldn't come away once your back was turned, sir, not if
they hadn't sent him home themselves like."
Ransom reassured the woman as well as he could and bade her goodbye, after ascertaining
that he would find The Rise on his left in about five minutes. Stiffness had grown upon him
while he was standing still, and he proceeded slowly and painfully on his way.
There was no sign of any lights on the left of the road - nothing but the flat fields and a mass
of darkness which he took to be a copse. It seemed more than five minutes before he reached it
and found that he had been mistaken. It was divided from the road by a good hedge and in the
hedge was a white gate: and the trees which rose above him as he examined the gate were not
the first line of a copse but only a belt, and the sky showed through them. He felt quite sure
now that this must be the gate of The Rise and that these trees surrounded a house and garden.
He tried the gate and found it locked. He stood for a moment undecided, discouraged by the
silence and the growing darkness. His first inclination, tired as he felt, was to continue his
journey to Sterk: but he had committed himself to a troublesome duty on behalf of the old
woman. He knew that it would be possible, if one really wanted, to force a way through the
hedge. He did not want to. A nice fool he would look, blundering in upon some retired
eccentric - the sort of a man who kept his gates locked in the country - with this silly story of a
hysterical mother in tears because her idiot boy had been kept half an hour late at his work! Yet
it was perfectly clear that he would have to get in, and since one cannot crawl through a hedge
with a pack on, he slipped his pack off and flung it over the gate. The moment he had done so,
it seemed to him that he had not till now fully made up his mind - now that he must break into
the garden if only in order to recover the pack. He became very angry with the woman, and
with himself, but he got down on his hands and knees and began to worm his way into the
hedge.
The operation proved more difficult than he had expected and it was several minutes before
he stood up in the wet darkness on the inner side of the hedge smarting from his contact with
thorns and nettles. He groped his way to the gate, picked up his pack, and then for the first time
turned to take stock of his surroundings. It was lighter on the drive than it had been under the
trees and he had no difficulty in making out a large stone house divided from him by a width of
untidy and neglected lawn. The drive branched into two a little way ahead of him - the righthand
path leading in a gentle sweep to the front door, while the left ran straight ahead, doubtless
to the back premises of the house. He noticed that this path was churned up into deep ruts -
now full of water - as if it were used to carrying a traffic of heavy lorries. The other, on which
he now began to approach the house, was overgrown with moss. The house itself showed no
light: some of the windows were shuttered, some gaped blank without shutter or curtain, but all
were lifeless and inhospitable. The only sign of occupation was a column of smoke that rose
from behind the house with a density which suggested the chimney of a factory, or at least of a
laundry, rather than that of a kitchen. The Rise was clearly the last place in the world where a
stranger was likely to be asked to stay the night, and Ransom, who had already wasted some
time in exploring it, would certainly have turned away if he had not been bound by his
unfortunate promise to the old woman.
He mounted the three steps which led into the deep porch, rang the bell, and waited. After a
time he rang the bell again and sat down on a wooden bench which ran along one side of the
porch. He sat so long that though the night was warm and starlit the sweat began to dry on his
face and a faint chilliness crept over his shoulders. He was very tired by now, and it was
perhaps this which prevented him from rising and ringing the third time: this, and the soothing
stillness of the garden, the beauty of the summer sky, and the occasional hooting of an owl
somewhere in the neighbourhood which seemed only to emphasize the underlying tranquillity
of his surroundings. Something like drowsiness had already descended upon him when he
found himself startled into vigilance. A peculiar noise was going on - a scuffling, irregular
noise, vaguely reminiscent of a football scrum. He stood up. The noise was unmistakable by
now. People in boots were fighting or wrestling or playing some game. They were shouting
too. He could not make out the words but he heard the monosyllabic barking ejaculations of
men who are angry and out of breath. The last thing Ransom wanted was an adventure, but a
conviction that he ought to investigate the matter was already growing upon him when a much
louder cry rang out in which he could distinguish the words, "Let me go. Let me go," and then,
a second later, "I'm not going in there. Let me go home."
Throwing off his pack, Ransom sprang down the steps of the porch, and ran round to the
back of the house as quickly as his stiff and footsore condition allowed him. The ruts and pools
of the muddy path led him to what seemed to be a yard, but a yard surrounded with an unusual
number of outhouses. He had a momentary vision of a tall chimney, a low door filled with red
firelight, and a huge round shape that rose black against the stars, which he took for the dome of
a small observatory: then all this was blotted out of his mind by the figures of three men who
were struggling together so close to him that he almost cannoned into them. From the very first
Ransom felt no doubt that the central figure, whom the two others seemed to be detaining in
spite of his struggles, was the old woman's Harry. He would like to have thundered out, "What
are you doing to that boy?" but the words that actually came - in rather an unimpressive voice -
were, "Here! I say!..."
The three combatants fell suddenly apart, the boy blubbering. "May I ask," said the thicker
and taller of the two men, "who the devil you may be and what you are doing here?" His voice
had all the qualities which Ransom's had so regrettably lacked.
"I'm on a walking tour," said Ransom, "and I promised a poor woman -"
"Poor woman be damned," said the other. "How did you get in?"
"Through the hedge," said Ransom, who felt a little ill-temper coming to his assistance. "I
don't know what you're doing to that boy, but -"
"We ought to have a dog in this place," said the thick man to his companion, ignoring
Ransom.
"You mean we should have a dog if you hadn't insisted on using Tartar for an experiment,"
said the man who had not yet spoken. He was nearly as tall as the other, but slender, and
apparently the younger of the two, and his voice sounded vaguely familiar to Ransom.
The latter made a fresh beginning. "Look here," he said, "I don't know what you are doing to
that boy, but it's long after hours and it is high time you sent him home. I haven't the least wish
to interfere in your private affairs, but -"
"Who are you?" bawled the thick man.
"My name is Ransom, if that is what you mean. And -"
"By Jove," said the slender man, "not Ransom who used to be at Wedenshaw?"
"I was at school at Wedenshaw," said Ransom.
"I thought I knew you as soon as you spoke," said the slender man. "I'm Devine. Don't you
remember me?"
"Of course. I should think I do!" said Ransom as the two men shook hands with the rather
laboured cordiality which is traditional in such meetings. In actual fact Ransom had disliked
Devine at school as much as anyone he could remember.
"Touching, isn't it?" said Devine. "The far-flung line even in the wilds of Sterk and
Nadderby. This is where we get a lump in our throats and remember Sunday evening Chapel in
the D.O.P. You don't know Weston, perhaps?" Devine indicated his massive and loud-voiced
companion. "The Weston," he added. "You know. The great physicist. Has Einstein on toast
and drinks a pint of Schrödinger's blood for breakfast. Weston, allow me to introduce my old
schoolfellow, Ransom. Dr Elwin Ransom. The Ransom, you know. The great philologist.
Has Jespersen on toast and drinks a pint -"
"I know nothing about it," said Weston, who was still holding the unfortunate Harry by the
collar. "And if you expect me to say that I am pleased to see this person who has just broken
into my garden, you will be disappointed. I don't care twopence what school he was at nor on
what unscientific foolery he is at present wasting money that ought to go to research. I want to
know what he's doing here: and after that I want to see the last of him."
"Don't be an ass, Weston," said Devine in a more serious voice. "His dropping in is
delightfully apropos. You mustn't mind Weston's little way, Ransom. Conceals a generous
heart beneath a grim exterior, you know. You'll come in and have a drink and something to eat,
of course ?"
"That's very kind of you," said Ransom. "But about the boy -"
Devine drew Ransom aside. "Balmy," he said in a low voice. "Works like a beaver as a rule
but gets these fits. We are only trying to get him into the wash-house and keep him quiet for an
hour or so till he's normal again. Can't let him go home in his present state. All done by
kindness. You can take him home yourself presently if you like - and come back and sleep
here."
Ransom was very much perplexed. There was something about the whole scene suspicious
enough and disagreeable enough to convince him that he had blundered on something criminal,
while on the other hand he had all the deep, irrational conviction of his age and class that such
things could never cross the path of an ordinary person except in fiction and could least of all be
associated with professors and old schoolfellows. Even if they had been ill-treating the boy,
Ransom did not see much chance of getting him from them by force.
While these thoughts were passing through his head, Devine had been speaking to Weston,
in a low voice, but no lower than was to be expected of a man discussing hospitable
arrangements in the presence of a guest. It ended with a grunt of assent from Weston. Ransom,
to whose other difficulties a merely social embarrassment was now being added, turned with
the idea of making some remark. But Weston was now speaking to the boy.
"You have given enough trouble for one night, Harry," he said. "And in a properly governed
country I'd know how to deal with you. Hold your tongue and stop snivelling. You needn't go
into the wash-house if you don't want -"
"It weren't the wash-house," sobbed the halfwit, "you know it weren't. I don't want to go in
that thing again."
"He means the laboratory," interrupted Devine. "He got in there and was shut in by accident
for a few hours once. It put the wind up him for some reason. Lo, the poor Indian, you know."
He turned to the boy. "Listen, Harry," he said. "This kind gentleman is going to take you home
as soon as he's had a rest. If you'll come in and sit down quietly in the hall I'll give you
something you like." He imitated the noise of a cork being drawn from a bottle - Ransom
remembered it had been one of Devine's tricks at school - and a guffaw of infantile
knowingness broke from Harry's lips.
"Bring him in," said Weston as he turned away and disappeared into the house. Ransom
hesitated to follow, but Devine assured him that Weston would be very glad to see him. The lie
was barefaced, but Ransom's desire for a rest and a drink were rapidly overcoming his social
scruples. Preceded by Devine and Harry, he entered the house and found himself a moment
later seated in an armchair and awaiting the return of Devine, who had gone to fetch
refreshments.
THE ROOM into which he had been shown revealed a strange mixture of luxury and squalor.
The windows were shuttered and curtainless, the floor was uncarpeted and strewn with packing
cases, shavings, newspapers and boots, and the wallpaper showed the stains left by the pictures
and furniture of the previous occupants. On the other hand, the only two armchairs were of the
costliest type, and in the litter which covered the tables, cigars, oyster shells and empty
champagne bottles jostled with tins of condensed milk and opened sardine tins, with cheap
crockery, broken bread, teacups a quarter full of tea and cigarette ends.
His hosts seemed to be a long time away, and Ransom fell to thinking of Devine. He felt for
him that sort of distaste we feel for someone whom we have admired in boyhood for a very
brief period and then outgrown. Devine had learned just half a term earlier than anyone else
that kind of humour which consists in a perpetual parody of the sentimental or idealistic clichés
of one's elders. For a few weeks his references to the Dear Old Place and to Playing the Game,
to the White Man's Burden and a Straight Bat, had swept everyone, Ransom included, off their
feet. But before he left Wedenshaw Ransom had already begun to find Devine a bore, and at
Cambridge he had avoided him, wondering from afar how anyone so flashy and, as it were,
ready-made could be so successful. Then had come the mystery of Devine's election to the
Leicester fellowship, and the further mystery of his increasing wealth. He had long since
abandoned Cambridge for London, and was presumably something 'in the city.' One heard of
him occasionally and one's informant usually ended either by saying, "A damn clever chap,
Devine, in his own way," or else by observing plaintively, "It's a mystery to me how that man
has got where he is." As far as Ransom could gather from the brief conversation in the yard, his
old schoolfellow had altered very little.
He was interrupted by the opening of the door. Devine entered alone, carrying a bottle of
whiskey on a tray with glasses, and a syphon.
"Weston is looking out something to eat," he said as he placed the tray on the floor beside
Ransom's chair, and addressed himself to opening the bottle. Ransom, who was very thirsty
indeed by now, observed that his host was one of those irritating people who forget to use their
hands when they begin talking. Devine started to prise up the silver paper which covered the
cork with the point of a corkscrew, and then stopped to ask:
"How do you come to be in this benighted part of the country?"
"I'm on a walking tour," said Ransom; "slept at Stoke Underwood last night and had hoped
to end at Nadderby tonight. They wouldn't put me up, so I was going on to Sterk."
"God! " exclaimed Devine, his corkscrew still idle. "Do you do it for money, or is it sheer
masochism?"
"Pleasure, of course," said Ransom, keeping his eye immovably on the still unopened bottle.
"Can the attraction of it be explained to the uninitiate?" asked Devine, remembering himself
sufficiently to rip up a small portion of the silver paper.
"I hardly know. To begin with, I like the actual walking -"
"God! You must have enjoyed the army. Jogging along to Thingummy, eh?"
"No, no. It's just the opposite of the army. The whole point about the army is that you are
never alone for a moment and can never choose where you're going or even what part of the
road you're walking on. On a walking tour you are absolutely detached. You stop where you
like and go on when you like. As long as it lasts you need consider no one and consult no one
but yourself."
"Until one night you find a wire waiting at your hotel saying, 'Come back at once,' " replied
Devine, at last removing the silver paper.
"Only if you were fool enough to leave a list of addresses and go to them! The worst that
could happen to me would be that man on the wireless saying, 'Will Dr Elwin Ransom, believed
to be walking somewhere in the Midlands -' "
"I begin to see the idea," said Devine, pausing in the very act of drawing the cork. "It
wouldn't do if you were in business. You are a lucky devil! But can even you just disappear
like that? No wife, no young, no aged but honest parent or anything of that sort ?"
"Only a married sister in India. And then, you see, I'm a don. And a don in the middle of
long vacation is almost a non-existent creature, as you ought to remember. College neither
knows nor cares where he is, and certainly no one else does."
The cork at last came out of the bottle with a heart-cheering noise.
"Say when," said Devine, as Ransom held out his glass. "But I feel sure there's a catch
somewhere. Do you really mean to say that no one knows where you are or when you ought to
get back, and no one can get hold of you ?"
Ransom was nodding in reply when Devine, who had picked up the syphon, suddenly swore.
"I'm afraid this is empty," he said. "Do you mind having water? I'll have to get some from the
scullery. How much do you like?"
"Fill it up, please," said Ransom.
A few minutes later Devine returned and handed Ransom his long delayed drink. The latter
remarked, as he put down the half-emptied tumbler with a sigh of satisfaction, that Devine's
choice of residence was at least as odd as his own choice of a holiday.
"Quite," said Devine. "But if you knew Weston you'd realize that it's much less trouble to go
where he wants than to argue the matter. What you call a strong colleague."
"Colleague?" said Ransom inquiringly.
"In a sense." Devine glanced at the door, drew his chair closer to Ransom's, and continued in
a more confidential tone. "He's the goods all right, though. Between ourselves, I am putting a
little money into some experiments he has on hand. It's all straight stuff - the march of progress
and the good of humanity and all that, but it has an industrial side."
While Devine was speaking something odd began to happen to Ransom. At first it merely
seemed to him that Devine's words were no longer making sense. He appeared to be saying that
he was industrial all down both sides but could never get an experiment to fit him in London.
Then he realized that Devine was not so much unintelligible as inaudible, which was not
surprising, since he was now so far away - about a mile away, though perfectly clear like
something seen through the wrong end of a telescope. From that bright distance where he sat in
his tiny chair he was gazing at Ransom with a new expression on his face. The gaze became
disconcerting. Ransom tried to move in his chair but found that he had lost all power over his
own body. He felt quite comfortable, but it was as if his legs and arms had been bandaged to
the chair and his head gripped in a vice; a beautifully padded, but quite immovable, vice. He
did not feel afraid, though he knew that he ought to be afraid and soon would be. Then, very
gradually, the room faded from his sight.
Ransom could never be sure whether what followed had any bearing on the events recorded
in this book or whether it was merely an irresponsible dream. It seemed to him that he and
Weston and Devine were all standing in a little garden surrounded by a wall. The garden was
bright and sunlit, but over the top of the wall you could see nothing but darkness. They were
trying to climb over the wall and Weston asked them to give him a hoist up. Ransom kept on
telling him not to go over the wall because it was so dark on the other side, but Weston insisted,
and all three of them set about doing so. Ransom was the last. He got astride on the top of the
wall, sitting on his coat because of the broken bottles. The other two had already dropped down
on the outside into the darkness, but before he followed them a door in the wall - which none of
them had noticed - was opened from without and the queerest people he had ever seen came
into the garden bringing Weston and Devine back with them. They left them in the garden and
retired into the darkness themselves, locking the door behind them. Ransom found it
impossible to get down from the wall. He remained sitting there, not frightened but rather
uncomfortable because his right leg, which was on the outside, felt so dark and his left leg felt
so light. "My leg will drop off if it gets much darker," he said. Then he looked down into the
darkness and asked, "Who are you?" and the Queer People must still have been there for they
all replied, "Hoo-Hoo-Hoo?" just like owls.
He began to realize that his leg was not so much dark as cold and stiff, because he had been
resting the other on it for so long: and also that he was in an armchair in a lighted room. A
conversation was going on near him and had, he now realized, been going on for some time.
His head was comparatively clear. He realized that he had been drugged or hypnotized, or both,
and he felt that some control over his own body was returning to him though he was still very
weak. He listened intently without trying to move.
"I'm getting a little tired of this, Weston," Devine was saying, "and specially as it's my
money that is being risked. I tell you he'll do quite as well as the boy, and in some ways better.
Only, he'll be coming round very soon now and we must get him on board at once. We ought to
have done it an hour ago."
"The boy was ideal," said Weston sulkily. "Incapable of serving humanity and only too
likely to propagate idiocy. He was the sort of boy who in a civilized community would be
automatically handed over to a state laboratory for experimental purposes."
"I dare say. But in England he is the sort of boy in whom Scotland Yard might conceivably
feel an interest. This busybody, on the other hand, will not be missed for months, and even then
no one will know where he was when he disappeared. He came alone. He left no address. He
has no family. And finally he has poked his nose into the whole affair of his own accord."
"Well, I confess I don't like it. He is, after all, human. The boy was really almost a - a
preparation. Still, he's only an individual, and probably a quite useless one. We're risking our
own lives, too. In a great cause -"
"For the Lord's sake don't start all that stuff now. We haven't time."
"I dare say," replied Weston, "he would consent if he could be made to understand."
"Take his feet and I'll take his head," said Devine.
"If you really think he's coming round," said Weston, "you'd better give him another dose.
We can't start till we get the sunlight. It wouldn't be pleasant to have him struggling in there for
three hours or so. It would be better if he didn't wake up till we were under way."
"True enough. Just keep an eye on him while I run upstairs and get another."
Devine left the room. Ransom saw through his half-closed eyes that Weston was standing
over him. He had no means of foretelling how his own body would respond, if it responded at
all, to a sudden attempt at movement, but he saw at once that he must take his chance. Almost
before Devine had closed the door he flung himself with all his force at Weston's feet. The
scientist fell forward across the chair, and Ransom, flinging him off with an agonizing effort,
rose and dashed out into the hall. He was very weak and fell as he entered it: but terror was
behind him and in a couple of seconds he had found the hall door and was working desperately
to master the bolts. Darkness and his trembling hands were against him. Before he had drawn
one bolt, booted feet were clattering over the carpetless floor behind him. He was gripped by
the shoulders and the knees. Kicking, writhing, dripping with sweat, and bellowing as loud as
he could in the faint hope of rescue, he prolonged the struggle with a violence of which he
would have believed himself incapable. For one glorious moment the door was open, the fresh
night air was in his face, he saw the reassuring stars and even his own pack lying in the porch.
Then a heavy blow fell on his head. Consciousness faded, and the last thing of which he was
aware was the grip of strong hands pulling him back into the dark passage, and the sound of a
closing door.
WHEN RANSOM came to his senses he seemed to be in bed in a dark room. He had a pretty
severe headache, and this, combined with a general lassitude, discouraged him at first from
attempting to rise or to take stock of his surroundings. He noticed, drawing his hand across his
forehead, that he was sweating freely, and this directed his attention to the fact that the room (if
it was a room) was remarkably warm. Moving his arms to fling off the bedclothes, he touched
a wall at the right side of the bed: it was not only warm, but hot. He moved his left hand to and
fro in the emptiness on the other side and noticed that there the air was cooler - apparently the
heat was coming from the wall. He felt his face and found a bruise over the left eye. This
recalled to his mind the struggle with Weston and Devine, and he instantly concluded that they
had put him in an outhouse behind their furnace. At the same time he looked up and
recognized the source of the dim light in which, without noticing it, he had all along been able
to see the movements of his own hands. There was some kind of skylight immediately over his
head - a square of night sky filled with stars. It seemed to Ransom that he had never looked out
on such a frosty night. Pulsing with brightness as with some unbearable pain or pleasure,
clustered in pathless and countless multitudes, dreamlike in clarity, blazing in perfect blackness,
the stars seized all his attention, troubled him, excited him, and drew him up to a sitting
position. At the same time they quickened the throb of his headache, and this reminded him
that he had been drugged. He was just formulating to himself the theory that the stuff they had
given him might have some effect on the pupil and that this would explain the unnatural
splendour and fullness of the sky, when a disturbance of silver light, almost a pale and
miniature sunrise, at one corner of the skylight, drew his eyes upward again. Some minutes
later the orb of the full moon was pushing its way into the field of vision. Ransom sat still and
watched. He had never seen such a moon - so white, so blinding and so large. 'Like a great
football just outside the glass,' he thought, and then, a moment later, 'No - it's bigger than that.'
By this time he was quite certain that something was seriously wrong with his eyes: no moon
could possibly be the size of the thing he was seeing.
The light of the huge moon - if it was a moon - had by now illuminated his surroundings
almost as clearly as if it were day. It was a very strange room. The floor was so small that the
bed and a table beside it occupied the whole width of it: the ceiling seemed to be nearly twice
as wide and the walls sloped outward as they rose, so that Ransom had the impression of lying
at the bottom of a deep and narrow wheelbarrow. This confirmed his belief that his sight was
either temporarily or permanently injured. In other respects, however, he was recovering
rapidly and even beginning to feel an unnatural lightness of heart and a not disagreeable
excitement. The heat was still oppressive, and he stripped off everything but his shirt and
trousers before rising to explore. His rising was disastrous and raised graver apprehensions in
his mind about the effects of being drugged. Although he had been conscious of no unusual
muscular effort, he found himself leaping from the bed with an energy which brought his head
into sharp contact with the skylight and flung him down again in a heap on the floor. He found
himself on the other side against the wall - the wall that ought to have sloped outwards like the
side of a wheelbarrow, according to his previous reconnaissance. But it didn't. He felt it and
looked at it: it was unmistakably at right angles to the floor. More cautiously this time, he rose
again to his feet. He felt an extraordinary lightness of body: it was with difficulty that he kept
his feet on the floor. For the first time a suspicion that he might be dead and already in the
ghost-life crossed his mind. He was trembling, but a hundred mental habits forbade him to
consider this possibility. Instead, he explored his prison. The result was beyond doubt: all the
walls looked as if they sloped outwards so as to make the room wider at the ceiling than it was
at the floor, but each wall as you stood beside it turned out to be perfectly perpendicular - not
only to sight but to touch also if one stooped down and examined with one's fingers the angle
between it and the floor. The same examination revealed two other curious facts. The room
was walled and floored with metal, and was in a state of continuous faint vibration - a silent
vibration with a strangely lifelike and unmechanical quality about it. But if the vibration was
silent, there was plenty of noise going on - a series of musical raps or percussions at quite
irregular intervals which seemed to come from the ceiling. It was as if the metal chamber in
which he found himself was being bombarded with small, tinkling missiles. Ransom was by
now thoroughly frightened - not with the prosaic fright that a man suffers in a war, but with a
heady, bounding kind of fear that was hardly distinguishable from his general excitement: he
was poised on a sort of emotional watershed from which, he felt, he might at any moment pass
either into delirious terror or into an ecstasy of joy. He knew now that he was not in a
submarine: and the infinitesimal quivering of the metal did not suggest the motion of any
wheeled vehicle. A ship then, he supposed, or some kind of airship ... but there was an oddity
in all his sensations for which neither supposition accounted. Puzzled, he sat down again on
the bed, and stared at the portentous moon.
An airship, some kind of flying machine ... but why did the moon look so big? It was larger
than he had thought at first. No moon could really be that size; and he realized now that he had
known this from the first but had repressed the knowledge through terror. At the same moment
a thought came into his head which stopped his breath - there could be no full moon at all that
night. He remembered distinctly that he had walked from Nadderby on a moonless night. Even
if the thin crescent of a new moon had escaped his notice, it could not have grown to this in a
few hours. It could not have grown to this at all - this megalomaniac disc, far larger than the
football he had at first compared it to, larger than a child's hoop, filling almost half the sky.
And where was the old 'man in the moon' - the familiar face that had looked down on all the
generations of men? The thing wasn't the Moon at all; and he felt his hair move on his scalp.
At that moment the sound of an opening door made him turn his head. An oblong of
dazzling light appeared behind him and instantly vanished as the door closed again, having
admitted the bulky form of a naked man whom Ransom recognized as Weston. No reproach,
no demand for an explanation, rose to Ransom's lips or even to his mind; not with that
monstrous orb above them. The mere presence of a human being, with its offer of at least some
companionship, broke down the tension in which his nerves had long been resisting a
bottomless dismay. He found, when he spoke, that he was sobbing.
"Weston! Weston!" he gasped. "What is it? It's not the Moon, not that size. It can't be, can
it?"
"No," replied Weston, "it's the Earth."
IV
RANSOM’S LEGS failed him, and he must have sunk back upon the bed, but he only became
aware of this many minutes later. At the moment he was unconscious of everything except his
fear. He did not even know what he was afraid of: the fear itself possessed his whole mind, a
formless, infinite misgiving. He did not lose consciousness, though he greatly wished that he
might do so. Any change - death or sleep, or, best of all, a waking which should show all this
for a dream - would have been inexpressibly welcome. None came. Instead, the lifelong selfcontrol
of social man, the virtues which are half hypocrisy or the hypocrisy which is half a
virtue, came back to him and soon he found himself answering Weston in a voice not
shamefully tremulous.
"Do you mean that?" he asked.
"Certainly."
"Then where are we?"
"Standing out from Earth about eighty-five thousand miles."
"You mean we're - in space." Ransom uttered the word with difficulty as a frightened child
speaks of ghosts or a frightened man of cancer.
Weston nodded.
"What for?" said Ransom. "And what on earth have you kidnapped me for? And how have
you done it?"
For a moment Weston seemed disposed to give no answer; then, as if on a second thought,
he sat down on the bed beside Ransom and spoke as follows:
"I suppose it will save trouble if I deal with these questions at once, instead of leaving you to
pester us with them every hour for the next month. As to how we do it - I suppose you mean
how the space-ship works - there's no good your asking that. Unless you were one of the four
or five real physicists now living you couldn't understand: and if there were any chance of your
understanding you certainly wouldn't be told. If it makes you happy to repeat words that don't
mean anything - which is, in fact, what unscientific people want when they ask for an
explanation - you may say we work by exploiting the less observed properties of solar radiation.
As to why we are here, we are on our way to Malacandra...."
"Do you mean a star called Malacandra?"
"Even you can hardly suppose we are going out of the solar system. Malacandra is much
nearer than that: we shall make it in about twenty-eight days."
"There isn’t a planet called Malacandra," objected Ransom.
"I am giving it its real name, not the name invented by terrestrial astronomers," said Weston.
"But surely this is nonsense," said Ransom. "How the deuce did you find out its real name,
as you call it?"
"From the inhabitants."
It took Ransom some time to digest this statement. "Do you mean to tell me you claim to
have been to this star before, or this planet, or whatever it is?"
"Yes."
"You can't really ask me to believe that," said Ransom. "Damn it all, it's not an everyday
affair. Why has no one heard of it? Why has it not been in all the papers?"
"Because we are not perfect idiots," said Weston gruffly.
After a few moments' silence Ransom began again. "Which planet is it in our terminology?"
he asked.
"Once and for all," said Weston, "I am not going to tell you. If you know how to find out
when we get there, you are welcome to do so: I don't think we have much to fear from your
scientific attainments. In the meantime, there is no reason for you to know."
"And you say this place is inhabited?" said Ransom.
Weston gave him a peculiar look and then nodded. The uneasiness which this produced in
Ransom rapidly merged in an anger which he had almost lost sight of amidst the conflicting
emotions that beset him.
"And what has all this to do with me?" he broke out. "You have assaulted me, drugged me,
and are apparently carrying me off as a prisoner in this infernal thing. What have I done to
you? What do you say for yourself?"
"I might reply by asking you why you crept into my backyard like a thief. If you had minded
your own business you would not be here. As it is, I admit that we have had to infringe your
rights. My only defence is that small claims must give way to great. As far as we know, we are
doing what has never been done in the history of man, perhaps never in the history of the
universe. We have learned how to jump off the speck of matter on which our species began;
infinity, and therefore perhaps eternity, is being put into the hands of the human race. You
cannot be so small-minded as to think that the rights or the life of an individual or of a million
individuals are of the slightest importance in comparison with this."
"I happen to disagree," said Ransom, "and I always have disagreed, even about vivisection.
But you haven't answered my question. What do you want me for? What good am I to do you
on this - on Malacandra?"
"That I don't know," said Weston. "It was no idea of ours. We are only obeying orders."
"Whose?"
There was another pause. "Come," said Weston at last. "There is really no use in continuing
this cross-examination. You keep on asking me questions I can't answer: in some cases because
I don't know the answers, in others because you wouldn't understand them. It will make things
very much pleasanter during the voyage if you can only resign your mind to your fate and stop
bothering yourself and us. It would be easier if your philosophy of life were not so insufferably
narrow and individualistic. I had thought no one could fail to be inspired by the role you are
being asked to play: that even a worm, if it could understand, would rise to the sacrifice. I
mean, of course, the sacrifice of time and liberty, and some little risk. Don't misunderstand
me."
"Well," said Ransom, "you hold all the cards, and I must make the best of it. I consider your
philosophy of life raving lunacy. I suppose all that stuff about infinity and eternity means that
you think you are justified in doing anything - absolutely anything - here and now, on the off
chance that some creatures or other descended from man as we know him may crawl about a
few centuries longer in some part of the universe."
"Yes - anything whatever," returned the scientist sternly, "and all educated opinion - for I do
not call classics and history and such trash education - is entirely on my side. I am glad you
raised the point, and I advise you to remember my answer. In the meantime, if you will follow
me into the next room, we will have breakfast. Be careful how you get up: your weight here is
hardly appreciable compared with your weight on Earth."
Ransom rose and his captor opened the door. Instantly the room was flooded with a dazzling
golden light which completely eclipsed the pale earthlight behind him.
"I will give you darkened glasses in a moment," said Weston as he preceded him into the
chamber whence the radiance was pouring. It seemed to Ransom that Weston went up a hill
towards the doorway and disappeared suddenly downwards when he had passed it. When he
followed - which he did with caution - he had the curious impression that he was walking up to
the edge of a precipice: the new room beyond the doorway seemed to be built on its side so that
its farther wall lay almost in the same plane as the floor of the room he was leaving. When,
however, he ventured to put forward his foot, he found that the floor continued flush and as he
entered the second room the walls suddenly righted themselves and the rounded ceiling was
over his head. Looking back, he perceived that the bedroom in its turn was now keeling over -
its roof a wall and one of its walls a roof.
"You will soon get used to it," said Weston, following his gaze. "The ship is roughly
spherical, and now that we are outside the gravitational field of the Earth 'down' means - and
feels - towards the centre of our own little metal world. This, of course, was foreseen and we
built her accordingly. The core of the ship is a hollow globe - we keep our stores inside it - and
the surface of that globe is the floor we are walking on. The cabins are arranged all round this,
their walls supporting an outer globe which from our point of view is the roof. As the centre is
always 'down,' the piece of floor you are standing on always feels flat or horizontal and the wall
you are standing against always seems vertical. On the other hand, the globe of floor is so
small that you can always see over the edge of it - over what would be the horizon if you were a
flea - and then you see the floor and walls of the next cabin in a different plane. It is just the
same on Earth, of course, only we are not big enough to see it."
After this explanation he made arrangements in his precise, ungracious way for the comfort
of his guest or prisoner. Ransom, at his advice, removed all his clothes and substituted a little
metal girdle hung with enormous weights to reduce, as far as possible, the unmanageable
lightness of his body. He also assumed tinted glasses, and soon found himself seated opposite
Weston at a small table laid for breakfast. He was both hungry and thirsty and eagerly attacked
the meal which consisted of tinned meat, biscuit, butter and coffee.
But all these actions he had performed mechanically. Stripping, eating and drinking passed
almost unnoticed, and all he ever remembered of his first meal in the spaceship was the tyranny
of heat and light. Both were present in a degree which would have been intolerable on Earth,
but each had a new quality. The light was paler than any light of comparable intensity that he
had ever seen; it was not pure white but the palest of all imaginable golds, and it cast shadows
as sharp as a floodlight. The heat, utterly free from moisture, seemed to knead and stroke the
skin like a gigantic masseur: it produced no tendency to drowsiness: rather, intense alacrity.
His headache was gone: he felt vigilant, courageous and magnanimous as he had seldom felt on
Earth. Gradually he dared to raise his eyes to the skylight. Steel shutters were drawn across all
but a chink of the glass, and that chink was covered with blinds of some heavy and dark
material; but still it was too bright to look at.
"I always thought space was dark and cold," he remarked vaguely.
"Forgotten the sun?" said Weston contemptuously.
Ransom went on eating for some time. Then he began, "If it's like this in the early morning,"
and stopped, warned by the expression on Weston's face. Awe fell upon him: there were no
mornings here, no evenings, and no night - nothing but the changeless noon which had filled for
centuries beyond history so many millions of cubic miles. He glanced at Weston again, but the
latter held up his hand.
"Don't talk," he said. "We have discussed all that is necessary. The ship does not carry
oxygen enough for any unnecessary exertion; not even for talking."
Shortly afterwards he rose, without inviting the other to follow him, and left the room by one
of the many doors which Ransom had not yet seen opened.
V
THE PERIOD spent in the space-ship ought to have been one of terror and anxiety for Ransom.
He was separated by an astronomical distance from every member of the human race except
two whom he had excellent reasons for distrusting. He was heading for an unknown
destination, and was being brought thither for a purpose which his captors steadily refused to
disclose. Devine and Weston relieved each other regularly in a room which Ransom was never
allowed to enter and where he supposed the controls of their machine must be. Weston, during
his watches off, was almost entirely silent. Devine was more loquacious and would often talk
and guffaw with the prisoner until Weston rapped on the wall of the control room and warned
them not to waste air. But Devine was secretive after a certain point. He was quite ready to
laugh at Weston's solemn scientific idealism. He didn't give a damn, he said, for the future of
the species or the meeting of two worlds.
"There's more to Malacandra than that," he would add with a wink. But when Ransom asked
him what more, he would lapse into satire and make ironical remarks about the white man's
burden and the blessings of civilization.
"It is inhabited, then?" Ransom would press.
"Ah - there's always a native question in these things," Devine would answer. For the most
part his conversation ran on the things he would do when he got back to Earth: oceangoing
yachts, the most expensive women and a big place on the Riviera figured largely in his plans.
"I'm not running all these risks for fun."
Direct questions about Ransom's own role were usually met with silence. Only once, in
reply to such a question, Devine, who was then in Ransom's opinion very far from sober,
admitted that they were rather "handing him the baby."
"But I'm sure," he added, "you'll live up to the old school tie."
All this, as I have said, was sufficiently disquieting. The odd thing was that it did not very
greatly disquiet him. It is hard for a man to brood on the future when he is feeling so extremely
well as Ransom now felt. There was an endless night on one side of the ship and an endless
day on the other: each was marvellous and he moved from the one to the other at his will
delighted. In the nights, which he could create by turning the handle of a door, he lay for hours
in contemplation of the skylight. The Earth's disc was nowhere to be seen; the stars, thick as
daisies on an uncut lawn, reigned perpetually with no cloud, no moon, no sunrise to dispute
their sway. There were planets of unbelievable majesty, and constellations undreamed of: there
were celestial sapphires, rubies, emeralds and pin-pricks of burning gold; far out on the left of
the picture hung a comet, tiny and remote: and between all and behind all, far more emphatic
and palpable than it showed on Earth, the undimensioned, enigmatic blackness. The lights
trembled: they seemed to grow brighter as he looked. Stretched naked on his bed, a second
Dana, he found it night by night more difficult to disbelieve in old astrology: almost he felt,
wholly he imagined, 'sweet influence' pouring or even stabbing into his surrendered body. All
was silence but for the irregular tinkling noises. He knew now that these were made by
meteorites, small, drifting particles of the worldstuff that smote continually on their hollow
drum of steel; and he guessed that at any moment they might meet something large enough to
make meteorites of ship and all. But he could not fear. He now felt that Weston had justly
called him little-minded in the moment of his first panic. The adventure was too high, its
circumstance too solemn, for any emotion save a severe delight. But the days - that is, the
hours spent in the sunward hemisphere of their microcosm - were the best of all. Often he rose
after only a few hours' sleep to return, drawn by an irresistible attraction, to the regions of light;
he could not cease to wonder at the noon which always awaited you however early you were to
seek it. There, totally immersed in a bath of pure ethereal colour and of unrelenting though
unwounding brightness, stretched his full length and with eyes half closed in the strange chariot
that bore them, faintly quivering, through depth after depth of tranquillity far above the reach of
night, he felt his body and mind daily rubbed and scoured and filled with new vitality. Weston,
in one of his brief, reluctant answers, admitted a scientific basis for these sensations: they were
receiving, he said, many rays that never penetrated the terrestrial atmosphere.
But Ransom, as time wore on, became aware of another and more spiritual cause for his
progressive lightening and exultation of heart. A nightmare, long engendered in the modern
mind by the mythology that follows in the wake of science, was falling off him. He had read of
'Space': at the back of his thinking for years had lurked the dismal fancy of the black, cold
vacuity, the utter deadness, which was supposed to separate the worlds. He had not known how
much it affected him till now - now that the very name 'Space' seemed a blasphemous libel for
this empyrean ocean of radiance in which they swam. He could not call it 'dead'; he felt life
pouring into him from it every moment. How indeed should it be otherwise, since out of this
ocean the worlds and all their life had come? He had thought it barren: he saw now that it was
the womb of worlds, whose blazing and innumerable offspring looked down nightly even upon
the Earth with so many eyes - and here, with how many more! No: Space was the wrong name.
Older thinkers had been wiser when they named it simply the heavens - the heavens which
declared the glory - the
'happy climes that ly
Where day never shuts his eye
Up in the broad fields of the sky.'
He quoted Milton's words to himself lovingly, at this time and often.
He did not, of course, spend all his time in basking. He explored the ship (so far as he was
allowed), passing from room to room with those slow movements which Weston enjoined upon
them lest exertion should overtax their supply of air. From the necessity of its shape, the spaceship
contained a good many more chambers than were in regular use: but Ransom was also
inclined to think that its owners - or at least Devine - intended these to be filled with cargo of
some kind on the return voyage. He also became, by an insensible process, the steward and
cook of the company; partly because he felt it natural to share the only labours he could share -
he was never allowed into the control room - and partly in order to anticipate a tendency which
Weston showed to make him a servant whether he would or not. He preferred to work as a
volunteer rather than in admitted slavery: and he liked his own cooking a good deal more than
that of his companions.
It was these duties that made him at first the unwilling, and then the alarmed, hearer of a
conversation which occurred about a fortnight (he judged) after the beginning of their voyage.
He had washed up the remains of their evening meal, basked in the sunlight, chatted with
Devine - better company than Weston, though in Ransom's opinion much the more odious of
the two - and retired to bed at his usual time. He was a little restless, and after an hour or so it
occurred to him that he had forgotten one or two small arrangements in the galley which would
facilitate his work in the morning. The galley opened off the saloon or day room, and its door
was close to that of the control room. He rose and went there at once. His feet, like the rest of
him, were bare.
The galley skylight was on the dark side of the ship, but Ransom did not turn on the light.
To leave the door ajar was sufficient, as this admitted a stream of brilliant sunlight. As
everyone who has 'kept house' will understand, he found that his preparations for the morning
had been even more incomplete than he supposed. He did his work well, from practice, and
therefore quietly. He had just finished and was drying his hands on the roller towel behind the
galley door when he heard the door of the control room open and saw the silhouette of a man
outside the galley - Devine's, he gathered. Devine did not come forward into the saloon, but
remained standing and talking - apparently into the control room. It thus came about that while
Ransom could hear distinctly what Devine said, he could not make out Weston's answers.
"I think it would be damn' silly," said Devine. "If you could be sure of meeting the brutes
where we alight there might be something in it. But suppose we have to trek? All we'd gain by
your plan would be having to carry a drugged man and his pack instead of letting a live man
walk with us and do his share of the work."
Weston apparently replied.
"But he can't find out," returned Devine. "Unless someone is fool enough to tell him.
Anyway, even if he suspects, do you think a man like that would have the guts to run away on a
strange planet? Without food? Without weapons? You'll find he'll eat out of your hand at the
first sight of a sorn."
Again Ransom heard the indistinct noise of Weston's voice.
"How should I know?" said Devine. "It may be some sort of chief: much more likely a
mumbo-jumbo."
This time came a very short utterance from the control room: apparently a question. Devine
answered at once.
"It would explain why he was wanted."
Weston asked him something more.
"Human sacrifice, I suppose. At least it wouldn't be human from their point of view; you
know what I mean."
Weston had a good deal to say this time, and it elicited Devine's characteristic chuckle.
"Quite, quite," he said. "It is understood that you are doing it, all from the highest motives.
So long as they lead to the same actions as my motives, you are quite welcome to them."
Weston continued, and this time Devine seemed to interrupt him.
"You're not losing your own nerve, are you?" he said. He was then silent for some time, as if
listening. Finally, he replied:
"If you're so fond of the brutes as that you'd better stay and interbreed - if they have sexes,
which we don't yet know. Don't you worry. When the time comes for cleaning the place up
we'll save one or two for you, and you can keep them as pets or vivisect them or sleep with
them or all three - whichever way it takes you.... Yes, I know. Perfectly loathsome. I was only
joking. Good night."
A moment later Devine closed the door of the control room, crossed the saloon and entered
his own cabin. Ransom heard him bolt the door of it according to his invariable, though
puzzling, custom. The tension with which he had been listening relaxed. He found that he had
been holding his breath, and breathed deeply again. Then cautiously he stepped out into the
saloon.
Though he knew that it would be prudent to return to his bed as quickly as possible, he
found himself standing still in the now familiar glory of the light and viewing it with a new and
poignant emotion. Out of this heaven, these happy climes, they were presently to descend - into
what? Sorns, human sacrifice, loathsome sexless monsters. What was a sorn? His own role in
the affair was now clear enough. Somebody or something had sent for him. It could hardly be
for him personally. The somebody wanted a victim - any victim - from Earth. He had been
picked because Devine had done the picking; he realized for the first time - in all circumstances
a late and startling discovery - that Devine had hated him all these years as heartily as he hated
Devine. But what was a sorn? When he saw them he would eat out of Weston's hands. His
mind, like so many minds of his generation, was richly furnished with bogies. He had read his
H. G. Wells and others. His universe was peopled with horrors such as ancient and mediaeval
mythology could hardly rival. No insect-like, vermiculate or crustacean Abominable, no
twitching feelers, rasping wings, slimy coils, curling tentacles, no monstrous union of
superhuman intelligence and insatiable cruelty seemed to him anything but likely on an alien
world. The sorns would be ... would be ... he dared not think what the sorns would be. And he
was to be given to them. Somehow this seemed more horrible than being caught by them.
Given, handed over, offered. He saw in imagination various incompatible monstrosities -
bulbous eyes, grinning jaws, horns, stings, mandibles. Loathing of insects, loathing of snakes,
loathing of things that squashed and squelched, all played their horrible symphonies over his
nerves. But the reality would be worse: it would be an extra-terrestrial Otherness - something
one had never thought of, never could have thought of. In that moment Ransom made a
decision. He could face death, but not the sorns. He must escape when they got to Malacandra,
if there were any possibility. Starvation, or even to be chased by sorns, would be better than
being handed over. If escape were impossible, then it must be suicide. Ransom was a pious
man. He hoped he would be forgiven. It was no more in his power, he thought, to decide
otherwise than to grow a new limb. Without hesitation he stole back into the galley and
secured the sharpest knife: henceforward he determined never to be parted from it.
Such was the exhaustion produced by terror that when he regained his bed he fell instantly
into stupefied and dreamless sleep.
VI
HE WOKE much refreshed, and even a little ashamed of his terror on the previous night. His
situation was, no doubt, very serious: indeed the possibility of returning alive to Earth must be
almost discounted. But death could be faced, and rational fear of death could be mastered. It
was only the irrational, the biological, horror of monsters that was the real difficulty: and this he
faced and came to terms with as well as he could while he lay in the sunlight after breakfast.
He had the feeling that one sailing in the heavens, as he was doing, should not suffer abject
dismay before any earthbound creature. He even reflected that the knife could pierce other
flesh as well as his own. The bellicose mood was a very rare one with Ransom. Like many
men of his own age, he rather underestimated than overestimated his own courage; the gap
between boyhood's dreams and his actual experience of the War had been startling, and his
subsequent view of his own unheroic qualities had perhaps swung too far in the opposite
direction. He had some anxiety lest the firmness of his present mood should prove a short-lived
illusion; but he must make the best of it.
As hour followed hour and waking followed sleep in their eternal day, he became aware of a
gradual change. The temperature was slowly falling. They resumed clothes. Later, they added
warm underclothes. Later still, an electric heater was turned on in the centre of the ship. And it
became certain, too - though the phenomenon was hard to seize - that the light was less
overwhelming than it had been at the beginning of the voyage. It became certain to the
comparing intellect, but it was difficult to feel what was happening as a diminution of light and
impossible to think of it as 'darkening' because, while the radiance changed in degree, its
unearthly quality had remained exactly the same since the moment he first beheld it. It was not,
like fading light upon the Earth, mixed with the increasing moisture and phantom colours of the
air. You might halve its intensity, Ransom perceived, and the remaining half would still be
what the whole had been - merely less, not other. Halve it again, and the residue would still be
the same. As long as it was at all, it would be itself - out even to that unimagined distance
where its last force was spent. He tried to explain what he meant to Devine.
"Like thingummy's soap!" grinned Devine. "Pure soap to the last bubble, eh?"
Shortly after this the even tenor of their life in the space-ship began to be disturbed. Weston
explained that they would soon begin to feel the gravitational pull of Malacandra.
"That means," he said, "that it will no longer be 'down' to the centre of the ship. It will be
'down' towards Malacandra - which from our point of view will be under the control room. As
a consequence, the floors of most of the chambers will become wall or roof, and one of the
walls a floor. You won't like it."
The result of this announcement, so far as Ransom was concerned, was hours of heavy
labour in which he worked shoulder to shoulder now with Devine and now with Weston as their
alternating watches liberated them from the control room. Water tins, oxygen cylinders, guns,
ammunition and foodstuffs had all to be piled on the floors alongside the appropriate walls and
lying on their sides so as to be upright when the new 'downwards' came into play. Long before
the work was finished disturbing sensations began. At first Ransom supposed that it was the
toil itself which so weighted his limbs: but rest did not alleviate the symptom, and it was
explained to him that their bodies, in response to the planet that had caught them in its field,
were actually gaining weight every minute and doubling in weight with every twenty-four
hours. They had the experiences of a pregnant woman, but magnified almost beyond
endurance.
At the same time their sense of direction - never very confident on the space-ship - became
continuously confused. From any room on board, the next room's floor had always looked
downhill and felt level: now it looked downhill and felt a little, a very little, downhill as well.
One found oneself running as one entered it. A cushion flung aside on the floor of the saloon
would be found hours later to have moved an inch or so towards the wall. All of them were
afflicted with vomiting, headache and palpitations of the heart. The conditions grew worse
hour by hour. Soon one could only grope and crawl from cabin to cabin. All sense of direction
disappeared in a sickening confusion. Parts of the ship were definitely below in the sense that
their floors were upside down and only a fly could walk on them: but no part seemed to
Ransom to be indisputably the right way up. Sensations of intolerable height and of falling -
utterly absent in the heavens - recurred constantly. Cooking, of course, had long since been
abandoned. Food was snatched as best they could, and drinking presented great difficulties:
you could never be sure that you were really holding your mouth below rather than beside, the
bottle. Weston grew grimmer and more silent than ever. Devine, a flask of spirits ever in his
hand, flung out strange blasphemies and coprologies and cursed Weston for bringing them.
Ransom ached, licked his dry lips, nursed his bruised limbs and prayed for the end.
A time came when one side of the sphere was unmistakably down. Clamped beds and tables
hung useless and ridiculous on what was now wall or roof. What had been doors became trapdoors,
opened with difficulty. Their bodies seemed made of lead. There was no more work to
be done when Devine had set out the clothes - their Malacandrian clothes - from their bundles
and squatted down on the end wall of the saloon (now its floor) to watch the thermometer. The
clothes, Ransom noticed, included heavy woollen underwear, sheepskin jerkins, fur gloves and
cared caps. Devine made no reply to his questions. He was engaged in studying the
thermometer and in shouting down to Weston in the control room.
"Slower, slower," he kept shouting. "Slower, you damned fool. You'll be in air in a minute
or two." Then sharply and angrily, "Here! Let me get at it."
Weston made no replies. It was unlike Devine to waste his advice: Ransom concluded that
the man was almost out of his senses, whether with fear or excitement.
Suddenly the lights of the Universe seemed to be turned down. As if some demon had
rubbed the heaven's face with a dirty sponge, the splendour in which they had lived for so long
blenched to a pallid, cheerless and pitiable grey. It was impossible from where they sat to open
the shutters or roll back the heavy blind. What had been a chariot gliding in the fields of
heaven became a dark steel box dimly lighted by a slit of window, and falling. They were
falling out of the heaven, into a world. Nothing in all his adventures bit so deeply into
Ransom's mind as this. He wondered how he could ever have thought of planets, even of the
Earth, as islands of life and reality floating in a deadly void. Now, with a certainty which never
after deserted him, he saw the planets - the 'earths' he called them in his thought - as mere holes
or gaps in the living heaven - excluded and rejected wastes of heavy matter and murky air,
formed not by addition to, but by subtraction from, the surrounding brightness. And yet, he
thought, beyond the solar system the brightness ends. Is that the real void, the real death?
Unless ... he groped for the idea ... unless visible light is also a hole or gap, a mere diminution
of something else. Something that is to bright unchanging heaven as heaven is to the dark,
heavy earths....
Things do not always happen as a man would expect. The moment of his arrival in an
unknown world found Ranson wholly absorbed in a philosophical speculation.
VII
"HAVING A doze?" said Devine. "A bit blasé about new planets by now?"
"Can you see anything?" interrupted Weston.
"I can't manage the shutters, damn them," returned Devine. "We may as well get to the
manhole."
Ransom awoke from his brown study. The two partners were working together close beside
him in the semi-darkness. He was cold and his body, though in fact much lighter than on Earth,
still felt intolerably heavy. But a vivid sense of his situation returned to him; some fear, but
more curiosity. It might mean death, but what a scaffold! Already cold air was coming in from
without, and light. He moved his head impatiently to catch some glimpse between the
labouring shoulders of the two men. A moment later the last nut was unscrewed. He was
looking out through the manhole.
Naturally enough all he saw was the ground - a circle of pale pink, almost of white: whether
very close and short vegetation or very wrinkled and granulated rock or soil he could not say.
Instantly the dark shape of Devine filled the aperture, and Ransom had time to notice that he
had a revolver in his hand - 'For me or for sorns or for both?' he wondered.
"You next," said Weston curtly.
Ransom took a deep breath and his hand went to the knife beneath his belt. Then he got his
head and shoulders through the manhole, his two hands on the soil of Malacandra. The pink
stuff was soft and faintly resilient, like india-rubber: clearly vegetation. Instantly Ransom
looked up. He saw a pale blue sky - a fine winter morning sky it would have been on Earth - a
great billowy cumular mass of rose-colour lower down which he took for a cloud, and then -
"Get out," said Weston from behind him.
He scrambled through and rose to his feet. The air was cold but not bitterly so, and it
seemed a little rough at the back of his throat. He gazed about him, and the very intensity of his
desire to take in the new world at a glance defeated itself. He saw nothing but colours - colours
that refused to form themselves into things. Moreover, he knew nothing yet well enough to see
it: you cannot see things till you know roughly what they are. His first impression was of a
bright, pale world - a watercolour world out of a child's paint-box; a moment later he
recognized the flat belt of light blue as a sheet of water, or of something like water, which came
nearly to his feet. They were on the shore of a lake or river.
"Now then," said Weston, brushing past him. He turned and saw to his surprise a quite
recognizable object in the immediate foreground - a hut of unmistakably terrestrial pattern
though built of strange materials.
"They're human," he gasped. "They build houses?"
"We do," said Devine. "Guess again," and, producing a key from his pocket, proceeded to
unlock a very ordinary padlock on the door of the hut. With a not very clearly defined feeling
of disappointment or relief Ransom realized that his captors were merely returning to their own
camp. They behaved as one might have expected. They walked into the hut, let down the slats
which served for windows, sniffed the close air, expressed surprise that they had left it so dirty,
and presently re-emerged.
"We'd better see about the stores," said Weston.
Ransom soon found that he was to have little leisure for observation and no opportunity of
escape. The monotonous work of transferring food, clothes, weapons and many unidentifiable
packages from the ship to the hut kept him vigorously occupied for the next hour or so, and in
the closest contact with his kidnappers. But something he learned. Before anything else he
learned that Malacandra was beautiful; and he even reflected how odd it was that this
possibility had never entered into his speculations about it. The same peculiar twist of
imagination which led him to people the universe with monsters had somehow taught him to
expect nothing on a strange planet except rocky desolation or else a network of nightmare
machines. He could not say why, now that he came to think of it. He also discovered that the
blue water surrounded them on at least three sides: his view in the fourth direction was blotted
out by the vast steel football in which they had come. The hut, in fact, was built either on the
point of a peninsula or on the end of an island. He also came little by little to the conclusion
that the water was not merely blue in certain lights like terrestrial water but 'really' blue. There
was something about its behaviour under the gentle breeze which puzzled him - something
wrong or unnatural about the waves. For one thing, they were too big for such a wind, but that
was not the whole secret. They reminded him somehow of the water that he had seen shooting
up under the impact of shells in pictures of naval battles. Then suddenly realization came to
him: they were the wrong shape, out of drawing, far too high for their length, too narrow at the
base, too steep in the sides. He was reminded of something he had read in one of those modern
poets about a sea rising in 'turreted walls.'
"Catch!" shouted Devine. Ransom caught and hurled the parcel on to Weston at the hut
door.
On one side the water extended a long way - about a quarter of a mile, he thought, but
perspective was still difficult in the strange world. On the other side it was much narrower, not
wider than fifteen feet perhaps, and seemed to be flowing over a shallow - broken and swirling
water that made a softer and more hissing sound than water on earth; and where it washed the
hither bank - the pinkish-white vegetation went down to the very brink - there was a bubbling
and sparkling which suggested effervescence. He tried hard, in such stolen glances as the work
allowed him, to make out something of the farther shore. A mass of something purple, so huge
that he took it for a heather-covered mountain, was his first impression: on the other side,
beyond the larger water, there was something of the same kind. But there, he could see over the
top of it. Beyond were strange upright shapes of whitish green: too jagged and irregular for
buildings, too thin and steep for mountains. Beyond and above these again was the rosecoloured
cloud-like mass. It might really be a cloud, but it was very solid looking and did not
seem to have moved since he first set eyes on it from the manhole. It looked like the top of a
gigantic red cauliflower - or like a huge bowl of red soapsuds - and it was exquisitely beautiful
in tint and shape.
Baffled by this, he turned his attention to the nearer shore beyond the shallows. The purple
mass looked for a moment like a plump of organ-pipes, then like a stack of rolls of cloth set up
on end, then like a forest of gigantic umbrellas blown inside out. It was in faint motion.
Suddenly his eyes mastered the object. The purple stuff was vegetation: more precisely it was
vegetables, vegetables about twice the height of English elms, but apparently soft and flimsy.
The stalks - one could hardly call them trunks - rose smooth and round, and surprisingly thin,
for about forty feet: above that, the huge plants opened into a sheaf-like development, not of
branches but of leaves, leaves large as lifeboats but nearly transparent. The whole thing
corresponded roughly to his idea of a submarine forest: the plants, at once so large and so frail,
seemed to need water to support them, and he wondered that they could hang in the air. Lower
down, between the stems, he saw the vivid purple twilight, mottled with paler sunshine, which
made up the internal scenery of the wood.
"Time for lunch," said Devine suddenly. Ransom straightened his back: in spite of the
thinness and coldness of the air, his forehead was moist. They had been working hard and he
was short of breath. Weston appeared from the door of the hut and muttered something about
'finishing first.' Devine, however, overruled him. A tin of beef and some biscuits were
produced, and the men sat down on the various boxes which were still plentifully littered
between the space-ship and the hut. Some whiskey - again at Devine's suggestion and against
Weston's advice - was poured into the tin cups and mixed with water: the latter, Ransom
noticed, was drawn from their own water tins and not from the blue lakes.
As often happens, the cessation of bodily activity drew Ransom's attention to the excitement
under which he had been labouring ever since their landing. Eating seemed almost out of the
question. Mindful, however, of a possible dash for liberty, he forced himself to eat very much
more than usual, and appetite returned as he ate. He devoured all that he could lay hands on
either of food or drink: and the taste of that first meal was ever after associated in his mind with
the first unearthly strangeness (never fully recaptured) of the bright, still, sparkling,
unintelligible landscape - with needling shapes of pale green, thousands of feet high, with
sheets of dazzling blue sodawater, and acres of rose-red soapsuds. He was a little afraid that his
companions might notice, and suspect, his new achievements as a trencherman; but their
attention was otherwise engaged. Their eyes never ceased roving the landscape; they spoke
abstractedly and often changed position, and were ever looking over their shoulders. Ransom
was just finishing his protracted meal when he saw Devine stiffen like a dog, and lay his hand
in silence on Weston's shoulder. Both nodded. They rose. Ransom, gulping down the last of
his whiskey, rose too. He found himself between his two captors. Both revolvers were out.
They were edging him to the shore of the narrow water, and they were looking and pointing
across it.
At first he could not see clearly what they were pointing at. There seemed to be some paler
and slenderer plants than he had noticed before amongst the purple ones: he hardly attended to
them, for his eyes were busy searching the ground - so obsessed was he with the reptile fears
and insect fears of modern imagining. It was the reflections of the new white objects in the
water that sent his eyes back to them: long, streaky, white reflections motionless in the running
water - four or five, no, to be precise, six of them. He looked up. Six white things were
standing there. Spindly and flimsy things, twice or three times the height of a man. His first
idea was that they were images of men, the work of savage artists; he had seen things like them
in books of archaeology. But what could they be made of, and how could they stand? - so
crazily thin and elongated in the leg, so top-heavily pouted in the chest, such stalky, flexiblelooking
distortions of earthly bipeds... like something seen in one of those comic mirrors. They
were certainly not made of stone or metal, for now they seemed to sway a little as he watched;
now with a shock that chased the blood from his cheeks he saw that they were alive, that they
were moving, that they were coming at him. He had a momentary, scared glimpse of their
faces, thin and unnaturally long, with long, drooping noses and drooping mouths of halfspectral,
half-idiotic solemnity. Then he turned wildly to fly and found himself gripped by
Devine.
"Let me go," he cried.
"Don't be a fool," hissed Devine, offering the muzzle of his pistol. Then, as they struggled,
one of the things sent its voice across the water to them: an enormous hornlike voice far above
their heads.
"They want us to go across," said Weston. Both the men were forcing him to the water's
edge. He planted his feet, bent his back and resisted donkey-fashion. Now the other two were
both in the water pulling him, and he was still on the land. He found that he was screaming.
Suddenly a second, much louder and less articulate noise broke from the creatures on the far
bank. Weston shouted, too, relaxed his grip on Ransom and suddenly fired his revolver not
across the water but up it. Ransom saw why at the same moment.
A line of foam like the track of a torpedo was speeding towards them, and in the midst of it
some large, shining beast. Devine shrieked a curse, slipped and collapsed into the water.
Ransom saw a snapping jaw between them, and heard the deafening noise of Weston's revolver
again and again beside him and, almost as loud, the clamour of the monsters on the far bank,
who seemed to be taking to the water, too. He had had no need to make a decision. The
moment he was free he had found himself automatically darting behind his captors, then behind
the space-ship and on as fast as his legs could carry him into the utterly unknown beyond it. As
he rounded the metal sphere a wild confusion of blue, purple and red met his eyes. He did not
slacken his pace for a moment's inspection. He found himself splashing through water and
crying out not with pain but with surprise because the water was warm. In less than a minute he
was climbing out on to dry land again. He was running up a steep incline. And now he was
running through purple shadow between the stems of another forest of the huge plants.
A MOMENT of inactivity, a heavy meal and an unknown world do not help a man to run.
Half an hour later, Ransom was walking, not running, through the forest, with a hand pressed to
his aching side and his ears strained for any noise of pursuit. The clamour of revolver shots and
voices behind him (not all human voices) had been succeeded first by rifle shots and calls at
long intervals and then by utter silence. As far as eye could reach he saw nothing but the stems
of the great plants about him receding in the violet shade, and far overhead the multiple
transparency of huge leaves filtering the sunshine to the solemn splendour of twilight in which
he walked. Whenever he felt able he ran again; the ground continued soft and springy, covered
with the same resilient weed which was the first thing his hands had touched in Malacandra.
Once or twice a small red creature scuttled across his path, but otherwise there seemed to be no
life stirring in the wood; nothing to fear - except the fact of wandering unprovisioned and alone
in a forest of unknown vegetation thousands or millions of miles beyond the reach or
knowledge of man.
But Ransom was thinking of sorns - for doubtless those were the sorns, those creatures they
had tried to give him to. They were quite unlike the horrors his imagination had conjured up,
and for that reason had taken him off his guard. They appealed away from the Wellsian
fantasies to an earlier, almost an infantile, complex of fears. Giants - ogres - ghosts - skeletons:
those were its key words. Spooks on stilts, he said to himself; surrealistic bogy-men with their
long faces. At the same time, the disabling panic of the first moments was ebbing away from
him. The idea of suicide was now far from his mind; instead, he was determined to back his
luck to the end. He prayed, and he felt his knife. He felt a strange emotion of confidence and
affection towards himself - he checked himself on the point of saying, "We'll stick to one
another."
The ground became worse and interrupted his meditation. He had been going gently
upwards for some hours with steeper ground on his right, apparently half scaling, half skirting a
hill. His path now began to cross a number of ridges, spurs doubtless of the higher ground on
the right. He did not know why he should cross them, but for some reason he did; possibly a
vague memory of earthly geography suggested that the lower ground would open out to bare
places between wood and water where sorns would be more likely to catch him. As he
continued crossing ridges and gullies he was struck with their extreme steepness; but somehow
they were not very difficult to cross. He noticed, too, that even the smallest hummocks of earth
were of an unearthly shape - too narrow, too pointed at the top and too small at the base. He
remembered that the waves on the blue lakes had displayed a similar oddity. And glancing up
at the purple leaves he saw the same theme of perpendicularity - the same rush to the sky -
repeated there. They did not tip over at the ends; vast as they were, air was sufficient to support
them so that the long aisles of the forest all rose to a kind of fan tracery. And the sorns,
likewise - he shuddered as he thought it - they too were madly elongated.
He had sufficient science to guess that he must be on a world lighter than the Earth, where
less strength was needed and nature was set free to follow her skyward impulse on a
superterrestrial scale. This set him wondering where he was. He could not remember whether
Venus was larger or smaller than Earth, and he had an idea that she would be hotter than this.
Perhaps he was on Mars; perhaps even on the Moon. The latter he at first rejected on the
ground that, if it were so, he ought to have seen the Earth in the sky when they landed; but later
he remembered having been told that one face of the Moon was always turned away from the
Earth. For all he knew he was wandering on the Moon's outer side; and irrationally enough,
this idea brought about him a bleaker sense of desolation than he had yet felt.
Many of the gullies which he crossed now carried streams, blue hissing streams, all
hastening to the lower ground on his left. Like the lake they were warm, and the air was warm
above them, so that as he climbed down and up the sides of the gullies he was continually
changing temperatures. It was the contrast, as he crested the farther bank of one such small
ravine, which first drew his attention to the growing chilliness of the forest; and as he looked
about him he became certain that the light was failing, too. He had not taken night into his
calculations. He had no means of guessing what night might be on Malacandra. As he stood
gazing into the deepening gloom a sigh of cold wind crept through the purple stems and set
them all swaying, revealing once again the startling contrast between their size and their
apparent flexibility and lightness. Hunger and weariness, long kept at bay by the mingled fear
and wonder of his situation, smote him suddenly. He shivered and forced himself to proceed.
The wind increased. The mighty leaves danced and dipped above his head, admitting glimpses
of a pale and then a paler sky; and then, discomfortingly, of a sky with one or two stars in it.
The wood was no longer silent. His eyes darted hither and thither in search of an approaching
enemy and discovered only how quickly the darkness grew upon him. He welcomed the
streams now for their warmth.
It was this that first suggested to him a possible protection against the increasing cold. There
was really no use in going farther; for all he knew he might as well be walking towards danger
as away from it. All was danger; he was no safer travelling than resting. Beside some stream it
might be warm enough to lie. He shuffled on to find another gully, and went so far that he
began to think he had got out of the region of them. He had almost determined to turn back
when the ground began falling steeply; he slipped, recovered and found himself on the bank of
a torrent. The trees - for as 'trees' he could not help regarding them - did not quite meet
overhead, and the water itself seemed to have some faintly phosphorescent quality, so that it
was lighter here. The fall from right to left was steep. Guided by some vague picnicker's
hankering for a 'better' place, he went a few yards upstream. The valley grew steeper, and he
came to a little cataract. He noticed dully that the water seemed to be descending a little too
slowly for the incline, but he was too tired to speculate about it. The water was apparently
hotter than that of the lake - perhaps nearer its subterranean source of heat. What he really
wanted to know was whether he dared drink it. He was very thirsty by now; but it looked very
poisonous, very unwatery. He would try not to drink it; perhaps he was so tired that thirst
would let him sleep. He sank on his knees and bathed his hands in the warm torrent; then he
rolled over in a hollow close beside the fall, and yawned.
The sound of his own voice yawning - the old sound heard in night nurseries, school
dormitories and in so many bedrooms - liberated a flood of self-pity. He drew his knees up and
hugged himself; he felt a sort of physical, almost a filial, love for his own body. He put his
wristwatch to his ear and found that it had stopped. He wound it. Muttering, half whimpering
to himself, he thought of men going to bed on the far-distant planet Earth - men in clubs, and
liners, and hotels, married men, and small children who slept with nurses in the room, and
warm, tobacco-smelling men tumbled together in forecastles and dug-outs. The tendency to
talk to himself was irresistible ... "We'll look after you, Ransom ... we'll stick together, old
man." It occurred to him that one of those creatures with snapping jaws might live in the
stream. "You're quite right, Ransom," he answered mumblingly. "It's not a safe place to spend
the night. We'll just rest a bit till you feel better, then we'll go on again. Not now. Presently."
IX
IT WAS thirst that woke him. He had slept warm, though his clothes were damp, and found
himself lying in sunlight, the blue waterfall at his side dancing and coruscating with every
transparent shade in the whole gamut of blue and flinging strange lights far up to the underside
of the forest leaves. The realization of his position, as it rolled heavily back upon
consciousness, was unbearable. If only he hadn't lost his nerve the sorns would have killed him
by now. Then he remembered with inexpressible relief that there was a man wandering in the
wood - poor devil - he'd be glad to see him. He would come up to him and say, "Hullo,
Ransom," - he stopped, puzzled. No, it was only himself: he was Ransom. Or was he? Who
was the man whom he had led to a hot stream and tucked up in bed, telling him not to drink the
strange water? Obviously some newcomer who didn't know the Place as well as he. But
whatever Ransom had told him, he was going to drink now. He lay down on the bank and
plunged his face in the warm rushing liquid. It was good to drink. It had a strong mineral
flavour, but it was very good. He drank again and found himself greatly refreshed and steadied.
All that about the other Ransom was nonsense. He was quite aware of the danger of madness,
and applied himself vigorously to his devotions and his toilet. Not that madness mattered
much. Perhaps he was mad already, and not really on Malacandra but safe in bed in an English
asylum. If only it might be so! He would ask Ransom - curse it! there his mind went playing
the same trick again. He rose and began walking briskly away.
The delusions recurred every few minutes as long as this stage of his journey lasted. He
learned to stand still mentally, as it were, and let them roll over his mind. It was no good
bothering about them. When they were gone you could resume sanity again. Far more
important was the problem of food. He tried one of the 'trees' with his knife. As he expected, it
was toughly soft like a vegetable, not hard like wood. He cut a little piece out of it, and under
this operation the whole gigantic organism vibrated to its top - it was like being able to shake
the mast of a full-rigged ship with one hand. When he put it in his mouth he found it almost
tasteless but by no means disagreeable, and for some minutes he munched away contentedly.
But he made no progress. The stuff was quite unswallowable and could only be used as a
chewing-gum. As such he used it, and after it many other pieces; not without some comfort.
It was impossible to continue yesterday's flight as a flight - inevitably it degenerated into an
endless ramble, vaguely motivated by the search for food. The search was necessarily vague,
since he did not know whether Malacandra held food for him nor how to recognize it if it did.
He had one bad fright in the course of the morning, when, passing through a somewhat more
open glade, he became aware first of a huge, yellow object, then of two, and then of an
indefinite multitude coming towards him. Before he could fly he found himself in the midst of
a herd of enormous pale furry creatures more like giraffes than anything else he could think of,
except that they could and did raise themselves on their hind legs and even progress several
paces in that position. They were slenderer, and very much higher, than giraffes, and were
eating the leaves off the tops of the purple plants. They saw him and stared at him with their
big liquid eyes, snorting in basso profondissimo, but had apparently no hostile intentions. Their
appetite was voracious. In five minutes they had mutilated the tops of a few hundred 'trees' and
admitted a new flood of sunlight into the forest. Then they passed on.
This episode had an infinitely comforting effect on Ransom. The planet was not, as he had
begun to fear, lifeless except for sorns. Here was a very presentable sort of animal, an animal
which man could probably tame, and whose food man could possibly share. If only it were
possible to climb the 'trees'! He was staring about him with some idea of attempting this feat,
when he noticed that the devastation wrought by the leaf-eating animals had opened a vista
overhead beyond the plant tops to a collection of the same greenish-white objects which he had
seen across the lake at their first landing.
This time they were much closer. They were enormously high, so that he had to throw back
his head to see the top of them. They were something like pylons in shape, but solid; irregular
in height and grouped in an apparently haphazard and disorderly fashion. Some ended in points
that looked from where he stood as sharp as needles, while others, after narrowing towards the
summit, expanded again into knobs or platforms that seemed to his terrestrial eyes ready to fall
at any moment. He noticed that the sides were rougher and more seamed with fissures than he
had realized at first, and between two of them he saw a motionless line of twisting blue
brightness - obviously a distant fall of water. It was this which finally convinced him that the
things, in spite of their improbable shape, were mountains; and with that discovery the mere
oddity of the prospect was swallowed up in the fantastic sublime. Here, he understood, was the
full statement of that perpendicular theme which beast and plant and earth all played on
Malacandra - here in this riot of rock, leaping and surging skyward like solid jets from some
rock fountain, and hanging by their own lightness in the air, so shaped, so elongated, that all
terrestrial mountains must ever after seem to him to be mountains lying on their sides. He felt a
lift and lightening at the heart.
But next moment his heart stood still. Against the pallid background of the mountains and
quite close to him - for the mountains themselves seemed but a quarter of a mile away - a
moving shape appeared. He recognized it instantly as it moved slowly (and, he thought,
stealthily) between two of the denuded plant tops - the giant stature, the cadaverous leanness,
the long, drooping, wizard-like profile of a sorn. The head appeared to be narrow and conical;
the hands or paws with which it parted the stems before it as it moved were thin, mobile,
spidery and almost transparent. He felt an immediate certainty that it was looking for him. All
this he took in in an infinitesimal time. The ineffaceable image was hardly stamped on his
brain before he was running as hard as he could into the thickest of the forest.
He had no plan save to put as many miles as he could between himself and the sorn. He
prayed fervently that there might be only one; perhaps the wood was full of them - perhaps they
had the intelligence to make a circle round him. No matter - there was nothing for it now but
sheer running, running, knife in hand. The fear had all gone into action; emotionally he was
cool and alert, and ready - as ready as he ever would be - for the last trial. His flight led him
downhill at an ever-increasing speed; soon the incline was so steep that if his body had had
terrestrial gravity he would have been compelled to take to his hands and knees and clamber
down. Then he saw something gleaming ahead of him. A minute later he had emerged from
the wood altogether; he was standing, blinking in the light of sun and water, on the shore of a
broad river, and looking out on a flat landscape of intermingled river, lake, island and
promontory - the same sort of country on which his eyes had first rested in Malacandra.
There was no sound of pursuit. Ransom dropped down on his stomach and drank, cursing a
world where cold water appeared to be unobtainable. Then he lay still to listen and to recover
his breath. His eyes were upon the blue water. It was agitated. Circles shuddered and bubbles
danced ten yards away from his face. Suddenly the water heaved and a round, shining, black
thing like a cannonball came into sight. Then he saw eyes and mouth - a puffing mouth
bearded with bubbles. More of the thing came up out of the water. It was gleaming black.
Finally it splashed and wallowed to the shore and rose, steaming, on its hind legs - six or seven
feet high and too thin for its height, like everything in Malacandra. It had a coat of thick black
hair, lucid as sealskin, very short legs with webbed feet, a broad beaver-like or fish-like tail,
strong fore-limbs with webbed claws or fingers, and some complication halfway up the belly
which Ransom took to be its genitals. It was something like a penguin, something like an otter,
something like a seal; the slenderness and flexibility of the body suggested a giant stoat. The
great round head, heavily whiskered, was mainly responsible for the suggestion of seal; but it
was higher in the forehead than a seal's and the mouth was smaller.
There comes a point at which the actions of fear and precaution are purely conventional, no
longer felt as terror or hope by the fugitive. Ransom lay perfectly still, pressing his body as
well down into the weed as he could, in obedience to a wholly theoretical idea that he might
thus pass unobserved. He felt little emotion. He noted in a dry, objective way that this was
apparently to be the end of his story - caught between a sorn from the land and a big, black
animal from the water. He had, it is true, a vague notion that the jaws and mouth of the beast
were not those of a carnivore; but he knew that he was too ignorant of zoology to do more than
guess.
Then something happened which completely altered his state of mind. The creature, which
was still steaming and shaking itself on the bank and had obviously not seen him, opened its
mouth and began to make noises. This in itself was not remarkable; but a lifetime of linguistic
study assured Ransom almost at once that these were articulate noises. The creature was
talking. It had language. If you are not yourself a philologist, I am afraid you must take on
trust the prodigious emotional consequences of this realization in Ransom's mind. A new world
he had already seen - but a new, an extra-terrestrial, a non-human language was a different
matter. Somehow he had not thought of this in connection with the sorns; now, it flashed upon
him like a revelation. The love of knowledge is a kind of madness. In the fraction of a second
which it took Ransom to decide that the creature was really talking, and while he still knew that
he might be facing instant death, his imagination had leaped over every fear and hope and
probability of his situation to follow the dazzling project of making a Malacandrian grammar.
An Introduction to the Malacandrian Language - The Lunar Verb - A Concise Martian-English
Dictionary... the titles flitted through his mind. And what might one not discover from the
speech of a non-human race? The very form of language itself, the principle behind all possible
languages, might fall into his hands. Unconsciously he raised himself on his elbow and stared
at the black beast. It became silent. The huge bullet head swung round and lustrous amber eyes
fixed him. There was no wind on the lake or in the wood. Minute after minute in utter silence
the representative of two so far-divided species stared each into the other's face.
Ransom rose to his knees. The creature leaped back, watching him intently, and they
became motionless again. Then it came a pace nearer, and Ransom jumped up and retreated,
but not far; curiosity held him. He summoned up his courage and advanced holding out his
hand; the beast misunderstood the gesture. It backed into the shallows of the lake and he could
see the muscles tightened under its sleek pelt, ready for sudden movement. But there it
stopped; it, too, was in the grip of curiosity. Neither dared let the other approach, yet each
repeatedly felt the impulse to do so himself, and yielded to it. It was foolish, frightening,
ecstatic and unbearable all in one moment. It was more than curiosity. It was like a courtship -
like the meeting of the first man and the first woman in the world; it was like something beyond
that; so natural is the contact of sexes, so limited. the strangeness, so shallow the reticence, so
mild the repugnance to be overcome, compared with the first tingling intercourse of two
different, but rational, species.
The creature suddenly turned and began walking away. A disappointment like despair smote
Ransom.
"Come back," he shouted in English. The thing turned, spread out its arms and spoke again
in its unintelligible language; then it resumed its progress. It had not gone more than twenty
yards away when Ransom saw it stoop down and pick something up. It returned. In its hand
(he was already thinking of its webbed fore-paw as a hand) it was carrying what appeared to be
a shell - the shell of some oyster-like creature, but rounder and more deeply domed. It dipped
the shell in the lake and raised it full of water. Then it held the shell to its own middle and
seemed to be pouring something into the water. Ransom thought with disgust that it was
urinating in the shell. Then he realized that the protuberances on the creature's belly were not
genital organs nor organs at all; it was wearing a kind of girdle hung with various pouch-like
objects, and it was adding a few drops of liquid from one of these to the water in the shell. This
done it raised the shell to its black lips and drank - not throwing back its head like a man but
bowing it and sucking like a horse. When it had finished it raffled the shell and once again
added a few drops from the receptacle - it seemed to be some kind of skin bottle - at its waist.
Supporting the shell in its two arms, it extended them towards Ransom. The intention was
unmistakable. Hesitantly, almost shyly, he advanced and took the cup. His fingertips touched
the webbed membrance of the creature's paws and an indescribable thrill of mingled attraction
and repulsion ran through him; then he drank. Whatever had been added to the water was
plainly alcoholic; he had never enjoyed a drink so much.
"Thank you," he said in English. "Thank you very much."
The creature struck itself on the chest and made a noise. Ransom did not at first realize what
it meant. Then he saw that it was trying to teach him its name - presumably the name of the
species.
"Hross," it said, "hross," and flapped itself.
"Hross," repeated Ransom, and pointed at it; then "Man," and struck his own chest.
"Hma - hma - hman," imitated the hross. It picked up a handful of earth, where earth
appeared between weed and water at the bank of the lake.
"Handra," it said. Ransom repeated the word. Then an idea occurred to him.
"Malacandra?" he said in an inquiring voice. The hross rolled its eyes and waved its arms,
obviously in an effort to indicate the whole landscape. Ransom was getting on well. Handra
was earth the element; Malacandra the 'earth' or planet as a whole. Soon he would find out
what Malac meant. In the meantime 'H disappears after C' he noted, and made his first step in
Malacandrian phonetics. The hross was now trying to teach him the meaning of handramit. He
recognized the root handra- again (and noted 'They have suffixes as well as prefixes'), but this
time he could make nothing of the hross's gestures, and remained ignorant what a handramit
might be. He took the initiative by opening his mouth, pointing to it and going through the
pantomime of eating. The Malacandrian word for food or eat which he got in return proved to
contain consonants unreproducible by a human mouth, and Ransom, continuing the pantomime,
tried to explain that his interest was practical as well as philological. The hross understood
him, though he took some time to understand from its gestures that it was inviting him to
follow it. In the end, he did so.
It took him only as far as where it had got the shell, and here, to his not very reasonable
astonishment, Ransom found that a kind of boat was moored. Man-like, when he saw the
artefact he felt more certain of the hross's rationality. He even valued the creature the more
because the boat, allowing for the usual Malacandrian height and flimsiness, was really very
like an earthly boat; only later did he set himself the question, "What else could a boat be like?'
The hross produced an oval platter of some tough but slightly flexible material, covered it with
strips of a spongy, orange-coloured substance and gave it to Ransom. He cut a convenient
length off with his knife and began to eat; doubtfully at first and then ravenously. It had a beanlike
taste but sweeter; good enough for a starving man. Then, as his hunger ebbed, the sense of
his situation returned with dismaying force. The huge, seal-like creature seated beside him
became unbearably ominous. It seemed friendly; but it was very big, very black, and he knew
nothing at all about it. What were its relations to the sorns? And was it really as rational as it
appeared?
It was only many days later that Ransom discovered how to deal with these sudden losses of
confidence. They arose when the rationality of the hross tempted you to think of it as a man.
Then it became abominable - a man seven feet high, with a snaky body, covered, face and all,
with thick black animal hair, and whiskered like a cat. But starting from the other end you had
an animal with everything an animal ought to have - glossy coat, liquid eye, sweet breath and
whitest teeth - and added to all these, as though Paradise had never been lost and earliest
dreams were true, the charm of speech and reason. Nothing could be more disgusting than the
one impression; nothing more delightful than the other. It all depended on the point of view.
X
WHEN RANSOM had finished his meal and drunk again of the strong waters of Malacandra,
his host rose and entered the boat. He did this head-first like an animal, his sinuous body
allowing him to rest his hands on the bottom of the boat while his feet were still planted on the
land. He completed the operation by flinging rump, tail and hind legs all together about five
feet into the air and then whisking them neatly on board with an agility which would have been
quite impossible to an animal of his bulk on Earth.
Having got into the boat, he proceeded to get out again and then pointed to it. Ransom
understood that he was being invited to follow his example. The question which he wanted to
ask above all others could not, of course, be put. Were the hrossa (he discovered later that this
was the plural of hross) the dominant species on Malacandra, and the sorns, despite their more
man-like shape, merely a semi-intelligent kind of cattle? Fervently he hoped that it might be so.
On the other hand, the hrossa might be the domestic animals of the sorns, in which case the
latter would be superintelligent. His whole imaginative training somehow encouraged him to
associate superhuman intelligence with monstrosity of form and ruthlessness of will. To step
on board the hross's boat might mean surrending himself to sorns at the other end of the
journey. On the other hand, the hross's invitation might be a golden opportunity of leaving the
sorn-haunted forests for ever. And by this time the hross itself was becoming puzzled at his
apparent inability to understand it. The urgency of its signs finally determined him. The
thought of parting from the hross could not be seriously entertained; its animality shocked him
in a dozen ways, but his longing to learn its language, and, deeper still, the shy, ineluctable
fascination of unlike for unlike, the sense that the key to prodigious adventure was being put in
his hands - all this had really attached him to it by bonds stronger than he knew. He stepped
into the boat.
The boat was without seats. It had a very high prow, an enormous expanse of free-board,
and what seemed to Ransom an impossibly shallow draught. Indeed, very little of it even rested
on the water; he was reminded of a modern European speed-boat. It was moored by something
that looked at first like rope; but the hross cast off not by untying but by simply pulling the
apparent rope in two as one might pull in two a piece of soft toffee or a roll of plasticine. It
then squatted down on its rump in the stern-sheets and took up a paddle - a paddle of such
enormous blade that Ransom wondered how the creature could wield it, till he again
remembered how light a planet they were on. The length of the hross's body enabled him to
work freely in the squatting position despite the high gunwale. It paddled quickly.
For the first few minutes they passed between banks wooded with the purple trees, upon a
waterway not more than a hundred yards in width. Then they doubled a promontory, and
Ransom saw that they were emerging on to a much larger sheet of water - a great lake, almost a
sea. The hross, now taking great care and often changing direction and looking about it,
paddled well out from the shore. The dazzling blue expanse grew moment by moment wider
around them; Ransom could not look steadily at it. The warmth from the water was oppressive;
he removed his cap and jerkin, and by so doing surprised the hross very much.
He rose cautiously to a standing position and surveyed the Malacandrian prospect which had
opened on every side. Before and behind them lay the glittering lake, here studded with islands,
and there smiling uninterruptedly at the pale blue sky; the sun, he noticed, was almost
immediately overhead - they were in the Malacandrian tropics. At each end the lake vanished
into more complicated groupings of land and water, softly, featherily embossed in the purple
giant weed. But this marshy land or chain of archipelagoes, as he now beheld it, was bordered
on each side with jagged walls of the pale green mountains, which he could still hardly call
mountains, so tall they were, so gaunt, sharp, narrow and seemingly unbalanced. On the
starboard they were not more than a mile away and seemed divided from the water only by a
narrow strip of forest; to the left they were far more distant, though still impressive - perhaps
seven miles from the boat. They ran on each side of the watered country as far as he could see,
both onwards and behind them; he was sailing, in fact, on the flooded floor of a majestic
canyon nearly ten miles wide and of unknown length. Behind and sometimes above the
mountain peaks he could make out in many places great billowy piles of the rose-red substance
which he had yesterday mistaken for cloud. The mountains, in fact, seemed to have no fall of
ground behind them; they were rather the serrated bastion of immeasurable tablelands, higher in
many places than themselves, which made the Malacandrian horizon left and right as far as eye
could reach. Only straight ahead and straight astern was the planet cut with the vast gorge,
which now appeared to him only as a rut or crack in the tableland.
He wondered what the cloud-like red masses were and endeavoured to ask by signs. The
question was, however, too particular for sign-language. The hross, with a wealth of
gesticulation - its arms or fore-limbs were more flexible than his and in quick motion almost
whip-like - made it clear that it supposed him to be asking about the high ground in general. It
named this harandra. The low, watered country, the gorge or canyon, appeared to be
handramit. Ransom grasped the implications, handra earth, harandra high earth, mountain,
handramit, low earth, valley. Highland and lowland, in fact. The peculiar importance of the
distinction in Malacandrian geography he learned later.
By this time the hross had attained the end of its careful navigation. They were a couple of
miles from land when it suddenly ceased paddling and sat tense with its paddle poised in the
air; at the same moment the boat quivered and shot forward as if from a catapult. They had
apparently availed themselves of some current. In a few seconds they were racing forward at
some fifteen miles an hour and rising and falling on the strange, sharp, perpendicular waves of
Malacandra with a jerky motion quite unlike that of the choppiest sea that Ransom had ever met
on Earth. It reminded him of disastrous experiences on a trotting horse in the army; and it was
intensely disagreeable. He gripped the gunwale with his left hand and mopped his brow with
his right - the damp warmth from the water had become very troublesome. He wondered if the
Malacandrian food, and still more the Malacandrian drink, were really digestible by a human
stomach. Thank heaven he was a good sailor! At least a fairly good sailor. At least -
Hastily he leaned over the side. Heat from blue water smote up to his face; in the depth he
thought he saw eels playing: long, silver eels. The worst happened not once but many times. In
his misery he remembered vividly the shame of being sick at a children's party ... long ago in
the star where he was born. He felt a similar shame now. It was not thus that the first
representative of humanity would choose to appear before a new species. Did hrossa vomit
too? Would it know what he was doing? Shaking and groaning, he turned back into the boat.
The creature was keeping an eye on him, but its face seemed to him expressionless; it was only
long after that he learned to read the Malacandrian face.
The current meanwhile seemed to be gathering speed. In a huge curve they swung across the
lake to within a furlong of the farther shore, then back again, and once more onward, in giddy
spirals and figures of eight, while purple wood and jagged mountain raced backwards and
Ransom loathingly associated their sinuous course with the nauseous curling of the silver eels.
He was rapidly losing all interest in Malacandra: the distinction between Earth and other planets
seemed of no importance compared with the awful distinction of earth and water. He wondered
despairingly whether the hross habitually lived on water. Perhaps they were going to spend the
night in this detestable boat....
His sufferings did not, in fact, last long. There came a blessed cessation of the choppy
movement and a slackening of speed, and he saw that the hross was backing water rapidly.
They were still afloat, with shores close on each side; between them a narrow channel in which
the water hissed furiously - apparently a shallow. The hross jumped overboard, splashing
abundance of warm water into the ship; Ransom, more cautiously and shakily, clambered after
it. He was about up to his knees. To his astonishment, the hross, without any appearance of
effort, lifted the boat bodily on to the top of its head, steadied it with one fore-paw, and
proceeded, erect as a Grecian caryatid, to the land. They walked forward - if the swinging
movements of the hross's short legs from its flexible hips could be called walking - beside the
channel. In a few minutes Ransom saw a new landscape.
The channel was not only a shallow but a rapid - the first, indeed, of a series of rapids by
which the water descended steeply for the next half mile. The ground fell away before them
and the canyon - or handramit - continued at a very much lower level. Its walls, however, did
not sink with it, and from his present position Ransom got a clearer notion of the lie of the land.
Far more of the highlands to left and right were visible, sometimes covered with the cloud-like
red swellings, but more often level, pale and barren to where the smooth line of their horizon
marched with the sky. The mountain peaks now appeared only as the fringe or border of the
true highland, surrounding it as the lower teeth surround the tongue. He was struck by the vivid
contrast between harandra and handramit. Like a rope of jewels the gorge spread beneath him,
purple, sapphire blue, yellow and pinkish white, a rich and variegated inlay of wooded land and
disappearing, reappearing, ubiquitous water. Malacandra was less like earth than he had been
beginning to suppose. The handramit was no true valley rising and falling with the mountain
chain it belonged to. Indeed, it did not belong to a mountain chain. It was only an enormous
crack or ditch, of varying depth, running through the high and level harandra; the latter, he now
began to suspect, was the true 'surface' of the planet - certainly would appear as surface to a
terrestrial astronomer. To the handramit itself there seemed no end; uninterrupted and very
nearly straight, it ran before him, a narrowing line of colour, to where it clove the horizon with
a V-shaped indenture. There must be a hundred miles of it in view, he thought; and he
reckoned that he had put some thirty or forty miles of it behind him since yesterday.
All this time they were descending beside the rapids to where the water was level again and
the hross could relaunch its skiff. During this walk Ransom learned the words for boat, rapid,
water, sun and carry; the latter, as his first verb, interested him particularly. The hross was also
at some pains to impress upon him an association or relation which it tried to convey by
repeating the contrasted pairs of words hrossa-handramit and séroni-harondra. Ransom
understood him to mean that the hrossa lived down in the handramit and the séroni up on the
harandra. What the deuce were séroni, he wondered. The open reaches of the harandra did
not look as if anything lived up there. Perhaps the hrossa had a mythology - he took it for
granted they were on a low cultural level - and the séroni were gods or demons.
The journey continued, with frequent, though decreasing, recurrences of nausea for Ransom.
Hours later he realized that séroni might very well be the plural of sorn.
The sun declined, on their right. It dropped quicker than on earth, or at least on those parts
of Earth that Ransom knew, and in the cloudless sky it had little sunset pomp about it. In some
other queer way which he could not specify it differed from the sun he knew; but even while he
speculated the needle-like mountain tops stood out black against it and the handramit grew
dark, though eastward (to their left) the high country of the harandra still shone pale rose,
remote and smooth and tranquil, like another and more spiritual world.
Soon he became aware that they were landing again, that they were treading solid ground,
were making or the depth of the purple forest. The motion of the boat still worked in his
fantasy and the earth seemed to sway beneath him; this, with weariness and twilight, made the
rest of the journey dream-like. Light began to glare in his eyes. A fire was burning. It
illuminated the huge leaves overhead, and he saw stars beyond them. Dozens of hrossa seemed
to have surrounded him; more animal, less human, in their multitude and their close
neighbourhood to him, than his solitary guide had seemed. He felt some fear, but more a
ghastly inappropriateness. He wanted men - any men, even Weston and Devine. He was too
tired to do anything about these meaningless bullet heads and furry faces - could make no
response at all. And then, lower down, closer to him, more mobile, came in throngs the whelps,
the puppies, the cubs, whatever you called them. Suddenly his mood changed. They were jolly
little things. He laid his hand on one black head and smiled; the creature scurried away.
He never could remember much of that evening. There was more eating and drinking, there
was continual coming and going of black forms, there were strange eyes luminous in the
firelight; finally, there was sleep in some dark, apparently covered place.
EVER SINCE he awoke on the space-ship Ransom had been thinking about the amazing
adventure of going to another planet, and about his chances of returning from it. What he had
not thought about was being on it. It was with a kind of stupefaction each morning that he
found himself neither arriving in, nor escaping from, but simply living on, Malacandra; waking,
sleeping, eating, swimming, and even, as the days passed, talking. The wonder of it smote him
most strongly when he found himself, about three weeks after his arrival, actually going for a
walk. A few weeks later he had his favourite walks, and his favourite foods; he was beginning
to develop habits. He knew a male from a female hross at sight, and even individual
differences were becoming plain. Hyoi who had first found him - miles away to the north - was
a very different person from the grey-muzzled, venerable Hnohra who was daily teaching him
the language; and the young of the species were different again. They were delightful. You
could forget all about the rationality of hrossa in dealing with them. Too young to trouble him
with the baffling enigma of reason in an inhuman form, they solaced his loneliness, as if he had
been allowed to bring a few dogs with him from the Earth. The cubs, on their part, felt the
liveliest interest in the hairless goblin which had appeared among them. With them, and
therefore indirectly with their dams, he was a brilliant success.
Of the community in general his earlier impressions were all gradually being corrected. His
first diagnosis of their culture was what he called 'old stone age.' The few cutting instruments
they possessed were made of stone. They seemed to have no pottery but a few clumsy vessels
used for boiling, and boiling was the only cookery they attempted. Their common drinking
vessel, dish and ladle all in one was the oyster-like shell in which he had first tasted hross
hospitality; the fish which it contained was their only animal food. Vegetable fare they had in
great plenty and variety, some of it delicious. Even the pinkish-white weed which covered the
whole handramit was edible at a pinch, so that if he had starved before Hyoi found him he
would have starved amidst abundance. No hross, however, ate the weed (honodraskrud) for
choice, though it might be used faute de mieux on a journey. Their dwellings were beehiveshaped
huts of stiff leaf and the villages - there were several in the neighbourhood - were
always built beside rivers for warmth and well upstream towards the walls of the handramit
where the water was hottest. They slept on the ground. They seemed to have no arts except a
kind of poetry and music which was practised almost every evening by a team or troupe of four
hrossa. One recited half chanting at great length while the other three, sometimes singly and
sometimes antiphonally, interrupted him from time to time with song. Ransom could not find
out whether these interruptions were simply lyrical interludes or dramatic dialogue arising out
of the leaders' narrative. He could make nothing of the music. The voices were not
disagreeable and the scale seemed adapted to human ears, but the time pattern was meaningless
to his sense of rhythm. The occupations of the tribe or family were at first mysterious. People
were always disappearing for a few days and reappearing again. There was a little fishing and
much journeying in boats of which he never discovered the object. Then one day he saw a kind
of caravan of hrossa setting out by land each with a load of vegetable food on its head.
Apparently there was some kind of trade in Malacandra.
He discovered their agriculture in the first week. About a mile down the handramit one
came to broad lands free of forest and clothed for many miles together in low pulpy vegetation
in which yellow, orange and blue predominated. Later on, there were lettuce-like plants about
the height of a terrestrial birch tree. Where one of these overhung the warmth of water you
could step into one of the lower leaves and lie deliciously as in a gently moving, fragrant
hammock. Elsewhere it was not warm enough to sit still for long out of doors; the general
temperature of the handramit was that of a fine winter's morning on Earth. These foodproducing
areas were worked communally by the surrounding villages, and division of labour
had been carried to a higher point than he expected. Cutting, drying, storing, transport and
something like manuring were all carried on, and he suspected that some at least of the water
channels were artificial.
But the real revolution in his understanding of the hrossa began when he had learned enough
of their language to attempt some satisfaction of their curiosity about himself. In answer to
their questions he began by saying that he had come out of the sky. Hnohra immediately asked
from which planet or earth (handra). Ransom, who had deliberately given a childish version of
the truth in order to adapt it to the supposed ignorance of his audience, was a little annoyed to
find Hnohra painfully explaining to him that he could not live in the sky because there was no
air in it; he might have come through the sky but he must have come from a handra. He was
quite unable to point Earth out to them in the night sky. They seemed surprised at his inability,
and repeatedly pointed out to him a bright planet low on the western horizon - a little south of
where the sun had gone down. He was surprised that they selected a planet instead of a mere
star and stuck to their choice; could it be possible that they understood astronomy?
Unfortunately he still knew too little of the language to explore their knowledge. He turned the
conversation by asking them the name of the bright southern planet, and was told that it was
Thulcandra - the silent world or planet.
"Why do you call it Thulc?" he asked. "Why silent?" No one knew.
"The séroni know," said Hnohra. "That is the sort of thing they know."
Then he was asked how he had come, and made a very poor attempt at describing the spaceship
- but again:
"The séroni would know."
Had he come alone? No, he had come with two others of his kind - bad men ('bent' men was
the nearest hrossian equivalent) who tried to kill him, but he had run away from them. The
hrossa found this very difficult, but all finally agreed that he ought to go to Oyarsa. Oyarsa
would protect him. Ransom asked who Oyarsa was. Slowly, and with many
misunderstandings, he hammered out the information that Oyarsa (1) lived in Meldilorn; (2)
knew everything and ruled everyone; (3) had always been there; and (4) was not a hross, nor
one of the séroni. Then Ransom, following his own idea, asked if Oyarsa had made the world.
The hrossa almost barked in the fervour of their denial. Did people in Thulcandra not know
that Maleldil the Young had made and still ruled the world? Even a child knew that. Where
did Maleldil live, Ransom asked.
"With the Old One."
And who was the Old One? Ransom did not understand the answer. He tried again.
"Where was the Old One?"
"He is not that sort," said Hnohra, "that he has to live anywhere," and proceeded to a good
deal which Ransom did not follow. But he followed enough to feel once more a certain
irritation. Ever since he had discovered the rationality of the hrossa he had been haunted by a
conscientious scruple as to whether it might not be his duty to undertake their religious
instruction; now, as a result of his tentative efforts, he found himself being treated as if he were
the savage and being given a first sketch of civilized religion - a sort of hrossian equivalent of
the shorter catechism. It became plain that Maleldil was a spirit without body, parts or
passions.
"He is not a hnau," said the hrossa.
"What is hnau?" asked Ransom.
"You are hnau. I am hnau. The séroni are hnau. The pfifltriggi are hnau."
"Pfifltriggi?" said Ransom.
"More than ten days' journey to the west," said Hnohra. "The harandra sinks down not in to
handramit but into a broad place, an open place, spreading every way. Five days' journey from
the north to the south of it; ten days' journey from the east to the west. The forests are of other
colours there than here, they are blue and green. It is very deep there, it goes to the roots of the
world. The best things that can be dug out of the earth are there. The Pfifltriggi live there.
They delight in digging. What they dig they soften with fire and make things of it. They are
little people, smaller than you, long in the snout, pale, busy. They have long limbs in front. No
hnau can match them in making and shaping things as none can match us in singing. But let
Hman see."
He turned and spoke to one of the younger hrossa and presently, passed from hand to hand,
there came to him a little bowl. He held it close to the firelight and examined it. It was certainly
of gold, and Ransom realized the meaning of Devine's interest in Malacandra.
"Is there much of this thing?" he asked.
Yes, he was told, it was washed down in most, of the rivers; but the best and most was
among the pfifltriggi, and it was they who were skilled in it. Arbol hru, they called it - Sun's
blood. He looked at the bowl again. It was covered with fine etching. He saw pictures of
hrossa and of smaller, ahnost frog-like animals; and then, of sorns. He pointed to the latter
inquiringly.
"Séroni," said the hrossa, confirming his suspicions. "They live up almost on the harandra.
In the big caves." The frog-like animals - or tapir-headed, frog-bodied animals - were pfifltriggi.
Ransom turned it over in his mind. On Malacandra, apparently, three distinct species had
reached rationality, and none of them had yet exterminated the other two. It concerned him
intensely to find out which was the real master.
"Which of the hnau rule?" he asked.
"Oyarsa rules," was the reply.
"Is he hnau?"
This puzzled them a little. The séroni, they thought, would be better at that kind of question.
Perhaps Oyarsa was hnau, but a very different hnau. He had no death and no young.
"These séroni know more than the hrossa?" asked Ransom.
This produced more a debate than an answer. What emerged finally was that the séroni or
sorns were perfectly helpless in a boat, and could not fish to save their lives, could hardly swim,
could make no poetry, and even when hrossa had made it for them could understand only the
inferior sorts; but they were admittedly good at finding out things about the stars and
understanding the darker utterances of Oyarsa and telling what happened in Malacandra long
ago - longer ago than anyone could remember.
'Ah - the intelligentsia,' thought Ransom. 'They must be the real rulers, however it is
disguised.'
He tried to ask what would happen if the sorns used their wisdom to make the hrossa do
things - this was as far as he could get in his halting Malacandrian. The question did not sound
nearly so urgent in this form as it would have done if he had been able to say "used their
scientific resources for the exploitation of their uncivilized neighbours." But he might have
spared his pains. The mention of the sorns' inadequate appreciation of poetry had diverted the
whole conversation into literary channels. Of the heated, and apparently technical, discussion
which followed he understood not a syllable.
Naturally his conversations with the hrossa did not all turn on Malacandra. He had to repay
them with information about Earth. He was hampered in this both by the humiliating
discoveries which he was constantly making of his own ignorance about his native planet, and
partly by his determination to conceal some of the truth. He did not want to tell them too much
of our human wars and industrialisms. He remembered how H. G. Wells's Cavor had met his
end on the Moon; also he felt shy. A sensation akin to that of physical nakedness came over
him whenever they questioned him too closely about men - the hmâna as they called them.
Moreover, he was determined not to let them know that he had been brought there to be given
to the sorns; for he was becoming daily more certain that these were the dominant species.
What he did tell them fired the imagination of the hrossa: they all began making poems about
the strange handra where the plants were hard like stone and the earth-weed green like rock and
the waters cold and salt, and hmâna, lived out on top, on the harandra.
They were even more interested in what he had to tell them of the aquatic animal with
snapping jaws which he had fled from in their own world and even in their own handramit. It
was a hnakra, they all agreed. They were intensely excited. There had not been a hnakra in the
valley for many years. The youth of the hrossa got out their weapons - primitive harpoons with
points of bone - and the very cubs began playing at hnakra-hunting in the shallows. Some of
the mothers showed signs of anxiety and wanted the cubs to be kept out of the water, but in
general the news of the hnakra seemed to be immensely popular. Hyoi set off at once to do
something to his boat, and Ransom accompanied him. He wished to make himself useful, and
was already beginning to have some vague capacity with the primitive hrossian tools. They
walked together to Hyoi's creek, a stone's throw through the forest.
On the way, where the path was single and Ransom was following Hyoi, they passed a little
she-hross, not much more than a cub. She spoke as they passed, but not to them: her eyes were
on a spot about five yards away.
"Who do you speak to, Hrikki?" said Ransom.
"To the eldil."
"Where?"
"Did you not see him?"
"I saw nothing."
"There! There! " she cried suddenly. "Ah! He is gone. Did you not see him?"
"I saw no one."
"Hyoi," said the cub, "the hmân cannot see the eldil!"
But Hyoi, continuing steadily on his way, was already out of earshot, and had apparently
noticed nothing. Ransom concluded that Hrikki was 'pretending' like the young of his own
species. In a few moments he rejoined his companion.
XII
THEY WORKED hard at Hyoi's boat till noon and then spread themselves on the weed close to
the warmth of the creek, and began their midday meal. The war-like nature of their
preparations suggested many questions to Ransom. He knew no word for war, but he managed
to make Hyoi understand what he wanted to know. Did séroni and hrossa and pfifltriggi ever
go out like this, with weapons, against each other?
"What for?" asked Hyoi.
It was difficult to explain. "If both wanted one thing and neither would give it," said
Ransom, "would the other at last come with force? Would they say, give it or we kill you?"
"What sort of thing?"
"Well - food, perhaps."
"If the other hnau wanted food, why should we not give it to them? We often do."
"But how if we had not enough for ourselves?"
"But Maleldil will not stop the plants growing."
"Hyoi, if you had more and more young, would Maleldil broaden the handramit and make
enough plants for them all?"
"The séroni know that sort of thing. But why should we have more young?"
Ransom found this difficult. At last he said:
"Is the begetting of young not a pleasure among the hrossa?"
"A very great one, Hman. This is what we call love."
"If a thing is a pleasure, a hmân wants it again. He might want the pleasure more often than
the number of young that could be fed."
It took Hyoi a long time to get the point.
"You mean," he said slowly, "that he might do it not only in one or two years of his life but
again?"
"Yes."
"But - why? Would he want his dinner all day or want to sleep after he had slept? I do not
understand."
"But a dinner comes every day. This love, you say, comes only once while the hross lives?"
"But it takes his whole life. When he is young he has to look for his mate; and then he has to
court her; then he begets young; then he rears them; then he remembers all this, and boils it
inside him and makes it into poems and wisdom."
"But the pleasure he must be content only to remember?"
"That is like saying 'My food I must be content only to eat.' "
"I do not understand."
"A pleasure is full grown only when it is remembered. You are speaking, Hmân, as if the
pleasure were one thing and the memory another. It is all one thing. The séroni could say it
better than I say it now. Not better than I could say it in a poem. What you call remembering is
the last part of the pleasure, as the crah is the last part of a poem. When you and I met, the
meeting was over very shortly, it was nothing. Now it is growing something as we remember
it. But still we know very little about it. What it will be when I remember it as I lie down to
die, what it makes in me all my days till then - that is the real meeting. The other is only the
beginning of it. You say you have poets in your world. Do they not teach you this?"
"Perhaps some of them do," said Ransom. "But even in a poem does a hross never long to
hear one splendid line over again?"
Hyoi's reply unfortunately turned on one of those points in their language which Ransom had
not mastered. There were two verbs which both, as far as he could see, meant to long or yearn;
but the hrossa drew a sharp distinction, even an opposition, between them. Hyoi seemed to
him merely to be saying that every one would long for it (wondelone) but no one in his senses
could long for it (hluntheline).
"And indeed," he continued, "the poem is a good example. For the most splendid line
becomes fully splendid only by means of all the lines after it; if you went back to it you would
find it less splendid than you thought. You would kill it. I mean in a good poem."
"But in a bent poem, Hyoi?"
"A bent poem is not listened to, Hmân."
"And how of love in a bent life?"
"How could the life of a hnau be bent?"
"Do you say, Hyoi, that there are no bent hrossa?"
Hyoi reflected. "I have heard," he said at last, "of something like what you mean. It is said
that sometimes here and there a cub at a certain age gets strange twists in him. I have heard of
one that wanted to eat earth; there might, perhaps, be somewhere a hross likewise that wanted
to have the years of love prolonged. I have not heard of it, but it might be. I have heard of
something stranger. There is a poem about a hross who lived long ago, in another handramit,
who saw things all made two - two suns in the sky, two heads on a neck; and last of all they say
that he fell into such a frenzy that he desired two mates. I do not ask you to believe it, but that is
the story: that he loved two hressni."
Ransom pondered this. Here, unless Hyoi was deceiving him, was a species naturally
continent, naturally monogamous. And yet, was it so strange? Some animals, he knew, had
regular breeding seasons; and if nature could perform the miracle of turning the sexual impulse
outward at all, why could she not go further and fix it, not morally but instinctively, to a single
object? He even remembered dimly having heard that some terrestrial animals, some of the
'lower' animals, were naturally monogamous. Among the hrossa, anyway, it was obvious that
unlimited breeding and promiscuity were as rare as the rarest perversions. At last it dawned
upon him that it was not they, but his own species, that were the puzzle. That the hrossa should
have such instincts was mildly surprising; but how came it that the instincts of the hrossa so
closely resembled the unattained ideals of that far-divided species Man whose instincts were so
deplorably different? What was the history of Man? But Hyoi was speaking again.
"Undoubtedly," he said. "Maleldil made us so. How could there ever be enough to eat if
everyone had twenty young? And how could we endure to live and let time pass if we were
always crying for one day or one year to come back - if we did not know that every day in a life
fills the whole life with expectation and memory and that these are that day ?"
"All the same," said Ransom, unconsciously nettled on behalf of his own world, "Maleldil
has let in the hnakra."
"Oh, but that is so different. I long to kill this hnakra as he also longs to kill me. I hope that
my ship will be the first and I first in my ship with my straight spear when the black jaws snap.
And if he kills me, my people will mourn and my brothers will desire still more to kill him. But
they will not wish that there were no hnéraki; nor do I. How can I make you understand, when
you do not understand the poets? The hnakra is our enemy, but he is also our beloved. We feel
in our hearts his joy as he looks down from the mountain of water in the north where he was
born; we leap with him when he jumps the falls; and when winter comes, and the lake smokes
higher than our heads, it is with his eyes that we see it and know that his roaming time is come.
We hang images of him in our houses, and the sign of all the hrossa is a hnakra. In him the
spirit of the valley lives; and our young play at being hnéraki as soon as they can splash in the
shallows."
"And then he kills them?"
"Not often them. The hrossa would be bent hrossa if they let him get so near. Long before
he had come down so far we should have sought him out. No, Hmân, it is not a few deaths
roving the world around him that make a hnau miserable. It is a bent hnau that would blacken
the world. And I say also this. I do not think the forest would be so bright, nor the water so
warm, nor love so sweet, if there were no danger in the lakes. I will tell you a day in my life that
has shaped me; such a day as comes only once, like love, or serving Oyarsa in Meldilorn. Then
I was young, not much more than a cub, when I went far, far up the handramit to the land where
stars shine at midday and even water is cold. A great waterfall I climbed. I stood on the shore
of Balki the pool, which is the place of most awe in all worlds. The walls of it go up for ever
and ever and huge and holy images are cut in them, the work of old times. There is the fall
called the Mountain of Water. Because I have stood there alone, Maleldil and I, for even
Oyarsa sent me no word, my heart has been higher, my song deeper, all my days. But do you
think it would have been so unless I had known that in Balki hnéraki dwelled? There I drank
life because death was in the pool. That was the best of drinks save one."
"What one?" asked Ransom.
"Death itself in the day I drink it and go to Maleldil."
Shortly after that they rose and resumed their work. The sun was declining as they came
back through the wood. It occurred to Ransom to ask Hyoi a question.
"Hyoi," he said, "it comes into my head that when I first saw you and before you saw me,
you were already speaking. That was how I knew that you were hnau, for otherwise I should
have thought you a beast, and run away. But who were you speaking to?"
"To an eldil."
"What is that? I saw no one."
"Are there no eldila in your world, Hmân? That must be strange."
"But what are they?"
"They come from Oyarsa - they are, I suppose, a kind of hnau."
"As we came out today I passed a child who said she was talking to an eldil, but I could see
nothing."
"One can see by looking at your eyes, Hmân, that they are different from ours. But eldila are
hard to see. They are not like us. Light goes through them. You must be looking in the right
place and the right time; and that is not likely to come about unless the eldil wishes to be seen.
Sometimes you can mistake them for a sunbeam or even a moving of the leaves; but when you
look again you see that it was an eldil and that it is gone. But whether your eyes can ever see
them I do not know. The séroni would know that."
THE WHOLE village was astir next morning before the sunlight - already visible on the
harandra - had penetrated the forest. By the light of the cooking fires Ransom saw an incessant
activity of hrossa. The females were pouring out steaming food from clumsy pots; Hnohra was
directing the transportation of piles of spears to the boats; Hyoi, in the midst of a group of the
most experienced hunters, was talking too rapidly and too technically for Ransom to follow;
parties were arriving from the neighbouring villages; and the cubs, squealing with excitement,
were running hither and thither among their elders.
He found that his own share in the hunt had been taken for granted. He was to be in Hyoi's
boat, with Hyoi and Whin. The two hrossa would take it in turns to paddle, while Ransom and
the disengaged hross would be in the bows. He understood the hrossa well enough to know
that they were making him the noblest offer in their power, and that Hyoi and Whin were each
tormented by the fear lest he should be paddling when the hnakra appeared. A short time ago,
in England, nothing would have seemed more impossible to Ransom than to accept the post of
honour and danger in an attack upon an unknown but certainly deadly aquatic monster. Even
more recently, when he had first fled from the sorns or when he had lain pitying himself in the
forest by night, it would hardly have been in his power to do what he was intending to do today.
For his intention was clear. Whatever happened, he must show that the human species also
were hnau. He was only too well aware that such resolutions might look very different when
the moment came, but he felt an unwonted assurance that somehow or other he would be able
to go through with it. It was necessary, and the necessary was always possible. Perhaps, too,
there was something in the air he now breathed, or in the society of the hrossa, which had
begun to work a change in him.
The lake was just giving back the first rays of the sun when he found himself kneeling side
by side with Whin, as he had been told to, in the bows of Hyoi's ship, with a little pile of
throwing-spears between his knees and one in his right hand, stiffening his body against the
motion as Hyoi paddled them out into their place. At least a hundred boats were taking part in
the hunt. They were in three parties. The central, and far the smallest, was to work its way up
the current by which Hyoi and Ransom had descended after their first meeting. Longer ships
than he had yet seen, eight-paddled ships, were used for this. The habit of the hnakra was to
float down the current whenever he could; meeting the ships, he would presumably dart out of
it into the still water to left or fight. Hence while the central party slowly beat up the current,
the light ships, paddling far faster, would cruise at will up and down either side of it to receive
the quarry as soon as he broke what might be called his 'cover.' In this game numbers and
intelligence were on the side of the hrossa; the hnakra had speed on his side, and also
invisibility, for he could swim under water. He was nearly invulnerable except through his
open mouth. If the two hunters in the bows of the boat he made for muffed their shots, this was
usually the last of them and of their boat.
In the light skirmishing parties there were two things a brave hunter could aim at. He could
keep well back and close to the long ships where the hnakra was most likely to break out, or he
could get as far forward as possible in the hope of meeting the hnakra going at its full speed
and yet untroubled by the hunt, and of inducing it, by a well-aimed spear, to leave the current
then and there. One could thus anticipate the beaters and kill the beast - if that was how the
matter ended - on one's own. This was the desire of Hyoi and Whin; and almost - so strongly
they infected him - of Ransom. Hence, hardly had the heavy craft of the beaters begun their
slow progress up-current amid a wall of foam when he found his own ship speeding northward
as fast as Hyoi could drive her, already passing boat after boat and making for the freest water.
The speed was exhilarating. In the cold morning the warmth of the blue expanse they were
clearing was not unpleasant. Behind them arose, re-echoed from the remote rock pinnacles on
either side of the valley, the bell-like, deep-mouthed voices of more than two hundred hrossa,
more musical than a cry of hounds but closely akin to it in quality as in purport. Something
long sleeping in the blood awoke in Ransom. It did not seem impossible at this moment that
even he might be the hnakra-slayer; that the fame of Hmân hnakrapunt might be handed down
to posterity in this world that knew no other man. But he had had such dreams before, and
knew how they ended. Imposing humility on the newly risen riot of his feelings, he turned his
eyes to the troubled water of the current which they were skirting, without entering, and
watched intently.
For a long time nothing happened. He became conscious of the stiffness of his attitude and
deliberately relaxed his muscles. Presently Whin reluctantly went aft to paddle, and Hyoi came
forward to take his place. Ahnost as soon as the change had been effected, Hyoi spoke softly to
him and said, without taking his eyes off the current:
"There is an eldil coming to us over the water."
Ransom could see nothing - or nothing that he could distinguish from imagination and the
dance of sunlight on the lake. A moment later Hyoi spoke again, but not to him.
"What is it, sky-born?"
What happened next was the most uncanny experience Ransom had yet had on Malacandra.
He heard the voice. It seemed to come out of the air, about a yard above his head, and it was
almost an octave higher than the hross's - higher even than his own. He realized that a very
little difference in his ear would have made the eldil as inaudible to him as it was invisible.
"It is the Man with you, Hyoi," said the voice. "He ought not to be there. He ought to be
going to Oyarsa. Bent hnau of his own kind from Thulcandra are following him; he should go
to Oyarsa. If they fid him anywhere else there will be evil."
"He hears you, sky-born," said Hyoi. "And have you no message for my wife? You know
what she wishes to be told."
"I have a message for Hleri," said the eldil. "But you will not be able to take it. I go to her
now myself. All that is well. Only - let the Man go to Oyarsa."
There was a moment's silence.
"He is gone," said Whin. "And we have lost our share in the hunt."
"Yes," said Hyoi with a sigh. "We must put Hmân ashore and teach him the way to
Meldilorn."
Ransom was not so sure of his courage but that one part of him felt an instant relief at the
idea of any diversion from their present business. But the other part of him urged him to hold
on to his new-found manhood; now or never - with such companions or with none - he must
leave a deed on his memory instead of one more broken dream. It was in obedience to
something like conscience that he exclaimed:
"No, no. There is time for that after the hunt. We must kill the hnakra first."
"Once an eldil has spoken," began Hyoi, when suddenly Whin gave a great cry (a 'bark'
Ransom would have called it three weeks ago) and pointed. There, not a furlong away, was the
torpedo-like track of foam; and now, visible through a wall of foam, they caught the metallic
glint of the monster's sides. Whin was paddling furiously. Hyoi threw and missed. As his first
spear smote the water his second was already in the air. This time it must have touched the
hnakra. He wheeled right out of the current. Ransom saw the great black pit of his mouth
twice open and twice shut with its snap of shark-like teeth. He himself had thrown now -
hurriedly, excitedly, with unpractised hand.
"Back," shouted Hyoi to Whin who was already backing water with every pound of his vast
strength. Then all became confused. He heard Whin shout "Shore!" There came a shock that
flung him forward almost into the hnakra's jaws and he found himself at the same moment up
to his waist in water. It was at him the teeth were snapping. Then as he flung shaft after shaft
into the great cavern of the gaping brute he saw Hyoi perched incredibly on its back - on its
nose - bending forward and hurling from there. Almost at once the hross was dislodged and
fell with a wide splash nearly ten yards away. But the hnakra was killed. It was wallowing on
its side, bubbling out its black life. The water around him was dark and stank.
When he recollected himself they were all on shore, wet, steaming, trembling with exertion
and embracing one another. It did not now seem strange to him to be clasped to a breast of wet
fur. The breath of the hrossa, which, though sweet, was not human breath, did not offend him.
He was one with them. That difficulty which they, accustomed to more than one rational
species, had perhaps never felt, was now overcome. They were all hnau. They had stood
shoulder to shoulder in the face of an enemy, and the shapes of their heads no longer mattered.
And he, even Ransom, had come through it and not been disgraced. He had grown up.
They were on a little promontory free of forest, on which they had run aground in the
confusion of the fight. The wreckage of the boat and the corpse of the monster lay confused
together in the water beside them. No sound from the rest of the hunting party was audible;
they had been almost a mile ahead when they met the hnakra. All three sat down to recover
their breath.
"So," said Hyoi, "we are hnakrapunti. This is what I have wanted all my life."
At that moment Ransom was deafened by a loud sound - a perfectly familiar sound which
was the last thing he expected to hear. It was a terrestrial, human and civilized sound; it was
even European. It was the crack of an English rifle; and Hyoi, at his feet, was struggling to rise
and gasping. There was blood on the white weed where he struggled. Ransom dropped on his
knees beside him. The huge body of the hross was too heavy for him to turn round. Whin
helped him.
"Hyoi, can you hear me?" said Ransom with his face close to the round seal-like head.
"Hyoi, it is through me that this has happened. It is the other hmâna who have hit you, the bent
two that brought me to Malacandra. They can throw death at a distance with a thing they have
made. I should have told you. We are all a bent race. We have come here to bring evil on
Malacandra. We are only half hnau - Hyoi..." His speech died away into the inarticulate. He
did not know the words for 'forgive,' or 'shame,' or 'fault,' hardly the word for 'sorry.' He could
only stare into Hyoi's distorted face in speechless guilt. But the hross seemed to understand. It
was trying to say something, and Ransom laid his ear close to the working mouth. Hyoi's
dulling eyes were fixed on his own, but the expression of a hross was not even now perfectly
intelligible to him.
"Hnâ-hmâ," it muttered and then, at last, "Hmân hnakrapunt." Then there came a contortion
of the whole body, a gush of blood and saliva from the mouth; his arms gave way under the
sudden dead weight of the sagging head, and Hyoi's face became as alien and animal as it had
seemed at their first meeting. The glazed eyes and the slowly stiffening, bedraggled fur, were
like those of any dead beast found in an earthly wood.
Ransom resisted an infantile impulse to break out into imprecations on Weston and Devine.
Instead he raised his eyes to meet those of Whin who was crouching - hrossa do not kneel - on
the other side of the corpse.
"I am in the hands of your people, Whin," he said. "They must do as they will. But if they
are wise they will kill me and certainly they will kill the other two."
"One does not kill hnau," said Whin. "Only Oyarsa does that. But these other, where are
they?"
Ransom glanced around. It was open on the promontory but thick wood came down to
where it joined the mainland, perhaps two hundred yards away.
"Somewhere in the wood," he said. "Lie down, Whin, here where the ground is lowest.
They may throw from their thing again."
He had some difficulty in making Whin do as he suggested. When both were lying in dead
ground, their feet almost in the water, the hross spoke again.
"Why did they kill him?" he asked.
"They would not know he was hnau," said Ransom. "I have told you that there is only one
kind of hnau in our world. They would think he was a beast. If they thought that, they would
kill him for pleasure, or in fear, or" (he hesitated) "because they were hungry. But I must tell
you the truth, Whin. They would kill even a hnau, knowing it to be hnau, if they thought its
death would serve them."
There was a short silence.
"I am wondering," said Ransom, "if they saw me. It is for me they are looking. Perhaps if I
went to them they would be content and come no farther into your land. But why do they not
come out of the wood to see what they have killed?"
"Our people are coming," said Whin, turning his head. Ransom looked back and saw the
lake black with boats. The main body of the hunt would be with them in a few minutes.
"They are afraid of the hrossa," said Ransom. "That is why they do not come out of the
wood. I will go to them, Whin."
"No," said Whin. "I have been thinking. All this has come from not obeying the eldil. He
said you were to go to Oyarsa. You ought to have been already on the road. You must go
now."
"But that will leave the bent hmâna here. They may do more harm."
"They will not set on the hrossa. You have said they are afraid. It is more likely that we will
come upon them. Never fear - they will not see us or hear us. We will take them to Oyarsa.
But you must go now, as the eldil said."
"Your people will think I have run away because I am afraid to look in their faces after
Hyoi's death."
"It is not a question of thinking but of what an eldil says. This is cubs' talk. Now listen, and
I will teach you the way."
The hross explained to him that five days' journey to the south the handramit joined another
handramit; and three days up this other handramit to west and north was Meldilorn and the seat
of Oyarsa. But there was a shorter way, a mountain road, across the corner of the harandra
between the two canyons, which would bring him down to Meldilorn on the second day. He
must go into the wood before them and through it till he came to the mountain wall of the
handramit; and he must work south along the roots of the mountains till he came to a road cut
up between them. Up this he must go, and somewhere beyond the tops of the mountains he
would come to the tower of Augray. Augray would help him. He could cut weed for his food
before he left the forest and came into the rock country. Whin realized that Ransom might meet
the other two hmâna as soon as he entered the wood.
"If they catch you," he said, "then it will be as you say, they will come no farther into our
land. But it is better to be taken on your way to Oyarsa than to stay here. And once you are on
the way to him, I do not think he will let the bent ones stop you."
Ransom was by no means convinced that this was the best plan either for himself or for the
hrossa. But the stupor of humiliation in which he had lain ever since Hyoi fell forbade him to
criticize. He was anxious only to do whatever they wanted him to do, to trouble them as little
as was now possible, and above all to get away. It was impossible to find out how Whin felt;
and Ransom sternly repressed an insistent, whining impulse to renewed protestations and
regrets, self-accusations that might elicit some word of pardon. Hyoi with his last breath had
called him hnakra-slayer; that was forgiveness generous enough and with that he must be
content. As soon as he had mastered the details of his route he bade farewell to Whin and
advanced alone towards the forest.
XIV
UNTIL HE reached the wood Ransom found it difficult to think of anything except the
possibility of another rifle bullet from Weston or Devine. He thought that they probably still
wanted him alive rather than dead, and this, combined with the knowledge that a hross was
watching him, enabled him to proceed with at least external composure. Even when he had
entered the forest he felt himself in considerable danger. The long branchless stems made
'cover' only if you were very far away from the enemy; and the enemy in this case might be very
close. He became aware of a strong impulse to shout out to Weston and Devine and give
himself up; it rationalized itself in the form that this would remove them from the district, as
they would probably take him off to the sorns and leave the hrossa unmolested. But Ransom
knew a little psychology and had heard of the hunted man's irrational instinct to give himself up
- indeed, he had felt it himself in dreams. It was some such trick, he thought, that his nerves
were now playing him. In any case he was determined henceforward to obey the hrossa or
eldila. His efforts to rely on his own judgment in Malacandra had so far ended tragically
enough. He made a strong resolution, defying in advance all changes of mood, that he would
faithfully carry out the journey to Meldilorn if it could be done.
This resolution seemed to him all the more certainly right because he had the deepest
misgivings about that journey. He understood that the harandra, which he had to cross, was the
home of the sorns. In fact he was walking of his own free will into the very trap that he had
been trying to avoid ever since his arrival on Malacandra. (Here the first change of mood tried
to raise its head. He thrust it down.) And even if he got through the sorns and reached
Meldilorn, who or what might Oyarsa be? Oyarsa, Whin had ominously observed, did not
share the hrossa's objection to shedding the blood of a hnau. And again, Oyarsa ruled sorns as
well as hrossa and pfifltriggi. Perhaps he was simply the arch-sorn. And now came the second
change of mood. Those old terrestrial fears of some alien, cold intelligence, superhuman in
power, subhuman in cruelty, which had utterly faded from his mind among the hrossa, rose
clamouring for readmission. But he strode on. He was going to Meldilorn. It was not possible,
he told himself, that the hrossa should obey any evil or monstrous creature; and they had told
him - or had they? he was not quite sure - that Oyarsa was not a sorn. Was Oyarsa a god? -
perhaps that very idol to whom the sorns wanted to sacrifice him. But the hrossa, though they
said strange things about him, clearly denied that he was a god. There was one God, according
to them, Maleldil the Young; nor was it possible to imagine Hyoi or Hnohra worshipping a
bloodstained idol. Unless, of course, the hrossa were after all under the thumb of the sorns,
superior to their masters in all the qualities that human beings value, but intellectually inferior
to them and dependent on them. It would be a strange but not an inconceivable world; heroism
and poetry at the bottom, cold scientific intellect above it, and overtopping all some dark
superstition which scientific intellect, helpless against the revenge of the emotional depths it
had ignored, had neither will nor power to remove. A mumbo-jumbo ... but Ransom pulled
himself up. He knew too much now to talk that way. He and all his class would have called the
eldila a superstition if they had been merely described to them, but now he had heard the voice
himself. No, Oyarsa was a real person if he was a person at all.
He had now been walking for about an hour, and it was nearly midday. No difficulty about
his direction had yet occurred; he had merely to keep going uphill and he was certain of coming
out of the forest to the mountain wall sooner or later. Meanwhile he felt remarkably well,
though greatly chastened in mind. The silent, purple half light of the woods spread all around
him as it had spread on the first day he spent in Malacandra, but everything else was changed.
He looked back on that time as on a nightmare, on his own mood at that time as a sort of
sickness. Then all had been whimpering, unanalysed, self-nourishing, self-consuming dismay.
Now, in the clear light of an accepted duty, he felt fear indeed, but with it a sober sense of
confidence in himself and in the world, and even an element of pleasure. It was the difference
between a landsman in a sinking ship and a horseman on a bolting horse: either may be killed,
but the horseman is an agent as well as a patient.
About an hour after noon he suddenly came out of the wood into bright sunshine. He was
only twenty yards from the almost perpendicular bases of the mountain spires, too close to them
to see their tops. A sort of valley ran up in the re-entrant between two of them at the place
where he had emerged: an unclimbable valley consisting of a single concave sweep of stone,
which in its lower parts ascended steeply as the roof of a house and farther up seemed almost
vertical. At the top it even looked as if it hung over a bit, like a tidal wave of stone at the very
moment of breaking; but this, he thought, might be an illusion. He wondered what the hrossa's
idea of a road might be.
He began to work his way southward along the narrow, broken ground between wood and
mountain. Great spurs of the mountains had to be crossed every few moments, and even in that
lightweight world it was intensely tiring. After about half an hour he came to a stream. Here he
went a few paces into the forest, cut himself an ample supply of the ground weed, and sat down
beside the water's edge for lunch. When he had finished he filled his pockets with what he had
not eaten and proceeded.
He began soon to be anxious about his road, for if he could make the top at all he could do it
only by daylight, and the middle of the afternoon was approaching. But his fears were
unnecessary. When it came it was unmistakable. An open way through the wood appeared on
the left - he must be somewhere behind the hross village now - and on the right he saw the road,
a single ledge, or in places, a trench, cut sidewise and upwards across the sweep of such a
valley as he had seen before. It took his breath away - the insanely steep, hideously narrow
staircase without steps, leading up and up from where he stood to where it was an almost
invisible thread on the pale green surface of the rock. But there was no time to stand and look
at it. He was a poor judge of heights, but he had no doubt that the top of the road was removed
from him by a more than Alpine distance. It would take him at least till sundown to reach it.
Instantly he began the ascent.
Such a journey would have been impossible on earth; the first quarter of an hour would have
reduced a man of Ransom's build and age to exhaustion. Here he was at first delighted with the
ease of his movement, and then staggered by the gradient and length of the climb which, even
under Malacandrian conditions, soon bowed his back and gave him an aching chest and
trembling knees. But this was not the worst. He heard already a singing in his ears, and noticed
that despite his labour there was no sweat on his forehead. The cold, increasing at every step,
seemed to sap his vitality worse than any heat could have done. Already his lips were cracked;
his breath, as he panted, showed like a cloud; his fingers were numb. He was cutting his way
up into a silent arctic world, and had already passed from an English to a Lapland winter. It
frightened him, and he decided that he must rest here or not at all; a hundred paces more and if
he sat down he would sit for ever. He squatted on the road for a few minutes, slapping his body
with his arms. The landscape was terrifying. Already the handramit which had made his world
for so many weeks was only a thin purple cleft sunk amidst the boundless level desolation of
the harandra which now, on the farther side, showed clearly between and above the mountain
peaks. But long before he was rested he knew that he must go on or die.
The world grew stranger. Among the hrossa he had almost lost the feeling of being on a
strange planet; here it returned upon him with desolating force. It was no longer 'the world,'
scarcely even 'a world': it was a planet, a star, a waste place in the universe, millions of miles
from the world of men. It was impossible to recall what he had felt about Hyoi, or Whin, or the
eldila, or Oyarsa. It seemed fantastic to have thought he had duties to such hobgoblins - if they
were not hallucinations - met in the wilds of space. He had nothing to do with them: he was a
man. Why had Weston and Devine left him alone like this?
But all the time the old resolution, taken when he could still think, was driving him up the
road. Often he forgot where he was going, and why. The movement became a mechanical
rhythm - from weariness to stillness, from stillness to unbearable cold, from cold to motion
again. He noticed that the handramit - now an insignificant part of the landscape - was full of a
sort of haze. He had never seen a fog while he was living there. Perhaps that was what the air
of the handramit looked like from above; certainly it was different air from this. There was
something more wrong with his lungs and heart than even the cold and the exertion accounted
for. And though there was no snow, there was an extraordinary brightness. The light was
increasing, sharpening and growing whiter; and the sky was a much darker blue than he had
ever seen on Malacandra. Indeed, it was darker than blue; it was almost black, and the jagged
spines of rock standing against it were like his mental picture of a lunar landscape. Some stars
were visible.
Suddenly he realized the meaning of these phenomena. There was very little air above him:
he was near the end of it. The Malacandrian atmosphere lay chiefly in the handramits; the real
surface of the planet was naked or thinly clad. The stabbing sunlight and the black sky above
him were that 'heaven' out of which he had dropped into the Malacandrian world, already
showing through the last thin veil of air. If the top were more than a hundred feet away, it
would be where no man could breathe at all. He wondered whether the hrossa had different
lungs and had sent him by a road that meant death for man. But even while he thought of this
he took note that those jagged peaks blazing in sunlight against an almost black sky were level
with him. He was no longer ascending. The road ran on before him in a kind of shallow ravine
bounded on his left by the tops of the highest rock pinnacles and on his right by a smooth
ascending swell of stone that ran up to the true harandra. And where he was he could still
breathe, though gasping, dizzy and in pain. The blaze in his eyes was worse. The sun was
setting. The hrossa must have foreseen this; they could not live, any more than he, on the
harandra by night. Still staggering forward, he looked about him for any sign of Augray's
tower, whatever Augray might be.
Doubtless he exaggerated the time during which he thus wandered and watched the shadows
from the rocks lengthening towards him. It cannot really have been long before he saw a light
ahead - a light which showed how dark the surrounding landscape had become. He tried to run
but his body would not respond. Stumbling in haste and weakness, he made for the light;
thought he had reached it and found that it was far farther off than he had supposed; almost
despaired; staggered on again, and came at last to what seemed a cavern mouth. The light
within was an unsteady one and a delicious wave of warmth smote on his face. It was firelight.
He came into the mouth of the cave and then, unsteadily, round the fire and into the interior,
and stood still blinking in the light. When at last he could see, he discerned a smooth chamber
of green rock, very lofty. There were two things in it. One of them, dancing on the wall and
roof, was the huge, angular shadow of a sorn: the other, crouched beneath it, was the sorn
himself.
XV
"COME IN, Small One," boomed the sorn. "Come in and let me look at you."
Now that he stood face to face with the spectre that had haunted him ever since he set foot
on Malacandra, Ransom felt a surprising indifference. He had no idea what might be coming
next, but he was determined to carry out his programme; and in the meantime the warmth and
more breathable air were a heaven in themselves. He came in, well in past the fire, and
answered the sorn. His own voice sounded to him a shrill treble.
"The hrossa have sent me to look for Oyarsa," he said.
The sorn peered at him. "You are not from this world," it said suddenly.
"No," replied Ransom, and sat down. He was too tired to explain.
"I think you are from Thulcandra, Small One," said the sorn.
"Why?" said Ransom.
"You are small and thick and that is how the animals ought to be made in a heavier world.
You cannot come from Glundandra, for it is so heavy that if any animals could live there they
would be flat like plates - even you, Small One, would break if you stood up on that world. I do
not think you are from Perelandra, for it must be very hot; if any came from there they would
not live when they arrived here. So I conclude you are from Thulcandra."
"The world I come from is called Earth by those who live there," said Ransom. "And it is
much warmer than this. Before I came into your cave I was nearly dead with cold and thin air."
The sorn made a sudden movement with one of its long fore-limbs. Ransom stiffened
(though he did not allow himself to retreat), for the creature might be going to grab him. In
fact, its intentions were kindly. Stretching back into the cave, it took from the wall what looked
like a cup. Then Ransom saw that it was attached to a length of flexible tube. The sorn put it
into his hands.
"Smell on this," it said. "The hrossa also need it when they pass this way."
Ransom inhaled and was instantly refreshed. His painful shortness of breath was eased and
the tension of chest and temples was relaxed. The sorn and the lighted cavern, hitherto vague
and dream-like to his eyes, took on a new reality.
"Oxygen?" he asked; but naturally the English word meant nothing to the sorn.
"Are you called Augray?" he asked.
"Yes," said the sorn. "What are you called?"
"The animal I am is called Man, and therefore the hrossa call me Hmân. But my own name
is Ransom."
"Man - Ren-soom," said the sorn. He noticed that it spoke differently from the hrossa,
without any suggestion of their persistent initial H.
It was sitting on its long, wedge-shaped buttocks with its feet drawn close up to it. A man in
the same posture would have rested his chin on his knees, but the sorn's legs were too long for
that. Its knees rose high above its shoulders on each side of its head - grotesquely suggestive of
huge ears - and the head, down between them, rested its chin on the protruding breast. The
creature seemed to have either a double chin or a beard; Ransom could not make out which in
the firelight. It was mainly white or cream in colour and seemed to be clothed down to the
ankles in some soft substance that reflected the light. On the long fragile shanks, where the
creature was closest to him, he saw that this was some natural kind of coat. It was not like fur
but more like feathers. In fact it was almost exactly like feathers. The whole animal, seen at
close quarters, was less terrifying than he had expected, and even a little smaller. The face, it
was true, took a good deal of getting used to - it was too long, too solemn and too colourless,
and it was much more unpleasantly like a human face than any inhuman creature's face ought to
be. Its eyes, like those of all very large creatures, seemed too small for it. But it was more
grotesque than horrible. A new conception of the sorns began to arise in his mind: the ideas of
'giant' and 'ghost' receded behind those of 'goblin' and 'gawk.'
"Perhaps you are hungry, Small One," it said.
Ransom was. The sorn rose with strange spidery movements and began going to and fro
about the cave, attended by its thin goblin shadow. It brought him the usual vegetable foods of
Malacandra, and strong drink, with the very welcome addition of a smooth brown substance
which revealed itself to nose, eye and palate, in defiance of all probability, as cheese. Ransom
asked what it was.
The sorn began to explain painfully how the female of some animals secreted a fluid for the
nourishment of its young, and would have gone on to describe the whole process of milking and
cheesemaking, if Ransom had not interrupted it.
"Yes, yes," he said. "We do the same on Earth. What is the beast you use?"
"It is a yellow beast with a long neck. It feeds on the forests that grow in the handramit.
The young ones of our people who are not yet fit for much else drive the beasts down there in
the mornings and follow them while they feed; then before night they drive them back and put
them in the caves."
For a moment Ransom found something reassuring in the thought that the sorns were
shepherds. Then he remembered that the Cyclops in Homer plied the same trade.
"I think I have seen one of your people at this very work," he said. "But the hrossa - they let
you tear up their forests?"
"Why should they not?"
"Do you rule the hrossa?"
"Oyarsa rules them."
"And who rules you?"
"Oyarsa."
"But you know more than the hrossa?"
"The hrossa know nothing except about poems and fish and making things grow out of the
ground."
"And Oyarsa - is he a sorn?"
"No, no, Small One. I have told you he rules all nau" (so he pronounced hnau) "and
everything in Malacandra."
"I do not understand this Oyarsa," said Ransom. "Tell me more."
"Oyarsa does not die," said the sorn. "And he does not breed. He is the one of his kind who
was put into Malacandra to rule it when Malacandra was made. His body is not like ours, nor
yours; it is hard to see and the light goes through it."
"Like an eldil?"
"Yes, he is the greatest of eldila who ever come to a handra."
"What are these eldila ?"
"Do you tell me, Small One, that there are no eldila in your world?"
"Not that I know of. But what are eldila, and why can I not see them? Have they no
bodies?"
"Of course they have bodies. There are a great many bodies you cannot see. Every animal's
eyes see some things but not others. Do you not know of many kinds of body in Thulcandra?"
Ransom tried to give the sorn some idea of the terrestrial terminology of solids, liquids and
gases. It listened with great attention.
"That is not the way to say it," it replied. "Body is movement. If it is at one speed, you
smell something; if at another, you hear a sound; if at another, you see a sight; if at another, you
neither see nor hear nor nor know the body in any way. But mark this, Small One, that the two
ends meet."
"How do you mean?"
"If movement is faster, then that which moves is more nearly in two places at once."
"That is true."
"But if the movement were faster still - it is difficult, for you do not know many words - you
see that if you made it faster and faster, in the end the moving thing would be in all places at
once, Small One."
"I think I see that."
"Well, then, that is the thing at the top of all bodies - so fast that it is at rest, so truly body
that it has ceased being body at all. But we will not talk of that. Start from where we are,
Small One. The swiftest thing that touches our senses is light. We do not truly see light, we
only see slower things lit by it, so that for us light is on the edge - the last thing we know before
things become too swift for us. But the body of an eldil is a movement swift as light; you may
say its body is made of light, but not of that which is light for the eldil. His 'light' is a swifter
movement which for us is nothing at all; and what we call light is for him a thing like water, a
visible thing, a thing he can touch and bathe in - even a dark thing when not illumined by the
swifter. And what we call firm things - flesh and earth - seems to him thinner, and harder to
see, than our light, and more like clouds, and nearly nothing. To us the eldil is a thin, half-real
body that can go through walls and rocks: to himself he goes through them because he is solid
and firm and they are like cloud. And what is true light to him and fills the heaven, so that he
will plunge into the rays of the sun to refresh himself from it, is to us the black nothing in the
sky at night. These things are not strange, Small One, though they are beyond our senses. But
it is strange that the eldila never visit Thulcandra."
"Of that I am not certain," said Ransom. It had dawned on him that the recurrent human
tradition of bright, elusive people sometimes appearing on the Earth - albs, devas and the like -
might after all have another explanation than the anthropologists had yet given. True, it would
turn the universe rather oddly inside out; but his experiences in the space-ship had prepared him
for some such operation.
"Why does Oyarsa send for me?" he asked.
"Oyarsa has not told me," said the sorn. "But doubtless he would want to see any stranger
from another handra."
"We have no Oyarsa in my world," said Ransom.
"That is another proof," said the sorn, "that you come from Thulcandra, the silent planet."
"What has that to do with it?"
The sorn seemed surprised. "It is not very likely if you had an Oyarsa that he would never
speak to ours."
"Speak to yours? But how could he - it is millions of miles away."
"Oyorsa would not think of it like that."
"Do you mean that he ordinarily receives messages from other planets ?"
"Once again, he would not say it that way. Oyarsa would not say that he lives on
Malacandra and that another Oyarsa lives on another earth. For him Malacandra is only a place
in the heavens; it is in the heavens that he and the others live. Of course they talk together ...."
Ransom's mind shied away from the problem; he was getting sleepy and thought he must be
misunderstanding the sorn.
"I think I must sleep, Augray," he said. "And I do not know what you are saying. Perhaps,
too, I do not come from what you call Thulcandra."
"We will both sleep presently," said the sorn. "But first I will show you Thulcandra."
It rose and Ransom followed it into the back of the cave. Here he found a little recess and
running up within it a winding stair. The steps, hewn for sorns, were too high for a man to
climb with any comfort, but using hands and knees he managed to hobble up. The sorn
preceded him. Ransom did not understand the light, which seemed to come from some small
round object which the creature held in its hand. They went up a long way, almost as if they
were climbing up the inside of a hollow mountain. At last, breathless, he found himself in a
dark but warm chamber of rock, and heard the sorn saying:
"She is still well above the southern horizon." It directed his attention to something like a
small window. Whatever it was, it did not appear to work like an earthly telescopes Ransom
thought; though an attempt, made next day, to explain the principles of the telescope to the sorn
threw grave doubts on his own ability to discern the difference. He leaned forward with his
elbows on the sill of the aperture and looked. He saw perfect blackness and, floating in the
centre of it, seemingly an arm's length away, a bright disk about the size of a half-crown. Most
of its surface was featureless, shining silver; towards the bottom markings appeared, and below
them a white cap, just as he had seen the polar caps in astronomical photographs of Mars. He
wondered for a moment if it was Mars he was looking at; then, as his eyes took in the markings
better, he recognized what they were - Northern Europe and a piece of North America. They
were upside down with the North Pole at the bottom of the picture and this somehow shocked
him. But it was Earth he was seeing - even, perhaps, England, though the picture shook a little
and his eyes were quickly getting tired, and he could not be certain that he was not imagining it.
It was all there in that little disk - London, Athens, Jerusalem, Shakespeare. There everyone
had lived and everything had happened; and there, presumably, his pack was still lying in the
porch of an empty house near Sterk.
"Yes," he said dully to the sorn. "That is my world." It was the bleakest moment in all his
travels.
XVI
RANSOM AWOKE next morning with the vague feeling that a great weight had been taken off
his mind. Then he remembered that he was the guest of a sorn and that the creature he had
been avoiding ever since he landed had turned out to be as amicable as the hrossa, though he
was far from feeling the same affection for it. Nothing then remained to be afraid of in
Malacandra except Oyarsa. 'The last fence,' thought Ransom.
Augray gave him food and drink.
"And now," said Ransom, "how shall I find my way to Oyarsa ?"
"I will carry you," said the sorn. "You are too small a one to make the journey yourself and I
will gladly go to Meldilorn. The hrossa should not have sent you this way. They do not seem
to know from looking at an animal what sort of lungs it has and what it can do. It is just like a
hross. If you died on the harandra they would have made a poem about the gallant hmân and
how the sky grew black and the cold stars shone and he journeyed on and journeyed on; and
they would have put in a fine speech for you to say as you were dying ... and all this would
seem to them just as good as if they had used a little forethought and saved your life by sending
you the easier way round."
"I like the hrossa," said Ransom a little stiffly. "And I think the way they talk about death is
the right way."
"They are right not to fear it, Ren-soom, but they do not seem to look at it reasonably as part
of the very nature of our bodies - and therefore often avoidable at times when they would never
see how to avoid it. For example, this has saved the life of many a hross, but a hross would not
have thought of it."
He showed Ransom a flask with a tube attached to it, and, at the end of the tube, a cup,
obviously an apparatus for administering oxygen to oneself.
"Smell on it as you have need, Small One," said the sorn. "And close it up when you do
not."
Augray fastened the thing on his back and gave the tube over his shoulder into his hand.
Ransom could not restrain a shudder at the touch of the sorn's hands upon his body; they were
fan-shaped, seven-fingered, mere skin over bone like a bird's leg, and quite cold. To divert his
mind from such reactions he asked where the apparatus was made, for he had as yet seen
nothing remotely like a factory or a laboratory.
"We thought it," said the sorn, "and the pfifltriggi made it."
"Why do they make them?" said Ransom. He was trying once more, with his insufficient
vocabulary, to find out the political and economic framework of Malacandrian life.
"They like making things," said Augray. "It is true they like best the making of things that
are only good to look at and of no use. But sometimes when they are tired of that they will
make things for us, things we have thought, provided they are difficult enough. They have not
patience to make easy things however useful they would be. But let us begin our journey. You
shall sit on my shoulder."
The proposal was unexpected and alarming, but seeing that the sorn had already crouched
down, Ransom felt obliged to climb on to the plume-like surface of its shoulder, to seat himself
beside the long, pale face, casting his right arm as far as it would go round the huge neck, and
to compose himself as well as he could for this precarious mode of travel. The giant rose
cautiously to a standing position and he found himself looking down on the landscape from a
height of about eighteen feet.
"Is all well, Small One?" it asked.
"Very well," Ransom answered, and the journey began.
Its gait was perhaps the least human thing about it. It lifted its feet very high and set them
down very gently. Ransom was reminded alternately of a cat stalking, a strutting barn-door
fowl, and a high-stepping carriage horse; but the movement was not really like that of any
terrestrial animal. For the passenger it was surprisingly comfortable. In a few minutes he had
lost all sense of what was dizzying or unnatural in his position. Instead, ludicrous and even
tender associations came crowding into his mind. It was like riding an elephant at the zoo in
boyhood - like riding on his father's back at a still earlier age. It was fun. They seemed to be
doing between six and seven miles an hour. The cold, though severe, was endurable; and
thanks to the oxygen he had little difficulty with his breathing.
The landscape which he saw from his high, swaying post of observation was a solemn one.
The handramit was nowhere to be seen. On each side of the shallow gully in which they were
walking, a world of naked, faintly greenish rock, interrupted with wide patches of red, extended
to the horizon. The heaven, darkest blue where the rock met it, was almost black at the zenith,
and looking in any direction where sunlight did not blind him, he could see the stars. He
learned from the sorn that he was right in thinking they were near the limits of the breathable.
Already on the mountain fringe that borders the harandra and walls the handramit, or in the
narrow depression along which their road led them, the air is of Himalayan rarity, ill breathing
for a hross, and a few hundred feet higher, on the harandra proper, the true surface of the
planet, it admits no life. Hence the brightness through which they walked was almost that of
heaven - celestial light hardly at all tempered with an atmospheric veil.
The shadow of the sorn, with Ransom's shadow on its shoulder, moved over the uneven rock
unnaturally distinct like the shadow of a tree before the headlights of a car; and the rock beyond
the shadow hurt his eyes. The remote horizon seemed but an arm's length away. The fissures
and moulding of distant slopes were clear as the background of a primitive picture made before
men learned perspective. He was on the very frontier of that heaven he had known in the spaceship,
and rays that the air-enveloped words cannot taste were once more at work upon his body.
He felt the old lift of the heart, the soaring solemnity, the sense, at once sober and ecstatic, of
life and power offered in unasked and unmeasured abundance. If there had been air enough in
hs lungs he would have laughed aloud. And now, even in the immediate landscape, beauty was
drawing near. Over the edge of the valley, as if it had frothed down from the true harandra,
came great curves of the rose-tinted, cumular stuff which he had seen so often from a distance.
Now on a nearer view they appeared hard as stone in substance, but puffed above and stalked
beneath like vegetation. His original simile of giant cauliflower turned out to be surprisingly
correct - stone cauliflowers the size of cathedrals and the colour of pale rose. He asked the sorn
what it was.
"It is the old forests of Malacandra," said Augray. "Once there was air on the harandra and
it was warm. To this day, if you could get up there and live, you would see it all covered with
the bones of ancient creatures; it was once full of life and noise. It was then these forests grew,
and in and out among their stalks went a people that have vanished from the world these many
thousand years. They were covered not with fur but with a coat like mine. They did not go in
the water swimming or on the ground walking; they glided in the air on broad flat limbs which
kept them up. It is said they were great singers, and in those days the red forests echoed with
their music. Now the forests have become stone and only eldila can go among them."
"We still have such creatures in our world," said Ransom. "We call them birds. Where was
Oyarsa when all this happened to the harandra?"
"Where he is now."
"And he could not prevent it?"
"I do not know. But a world is not made to last for ever, much less a race; that is not
Maleldil's way."
As they proceeded the petrified forests grew more numerous, and often for half an hour at a
time the whole horizon of the lifeless, almost airless, waste blushed like an English garden in
summer. They passed many caves where, as Augray told him, sorns lived; sometimes a high
cliff would be perforated with countless holes to the very top and unidentifiable noises came
hollowly from within. 'Work' was in progress, said the sorn, but of what kind it could not make
him understand. Its vocabulary was very different from that of the hrossa. Nowhere did he see
anything like a village or city of sorns, who were apparently solitary not social creatures. Once
or twice a long pallid face would show from a cavern mouth and exchange a horn-like greeting
with the travellers, but for the most part the long valley, the rock-street of the silent people, was
still and empty as the harandra itself.
Only towards afternoon, as they were about to descend into a dip of the road, they met three
sorns together coming towards them down the opposite slope. They seemed to Ransom to be
rather skating than walking. The lightness of their world and the perfect poise of their bodies
allowed them to lean forward at right angles to the slope, and they came swiftly down like fullrigged
ships before a fair wind. The grace of their movement, their lofty stature, and the
softened glancing of the sunfight on their feathery sides, effected a final transformation in
Ransom's feelings towards their race. 'Ogres' he had called them when they first met his eyes as
he struggled in the grip of Weston and Devine; 'Titans' or 'Angels' he now thought would have
been a better word. Even the faces, it seemed to him, he had not then seen aright. He had
thought them spectral when they were only august, and his first human reaction to their
lengthened severity of line and profound stillness of expression now appeared to him not so
much cowardly as vulgar. So might Parmenides or Confucius look to the eyes of a Cockney
schoolboy! The great white creatures sailed towards Ransom and Augray and dipped like trees
and passed.
In spite of the cold - which made him often dismount and take a spell on foot - he did not
wish for the end of the journey; but Augray had his own plans and halted for the night long
before sundown at the home of an older sorn. Ransom saw well enough that he was brought
there to be shown to a great scientist. The cave, or, to speak more correctly, the system of
excavations, was large and many-chambered, and contained a multitude of things that he did
not understand. He was specially interested in a collection of rolls, seemingly of skin, covered
with characters, which were clearly books; but he gathered that books were few in Malacandra.
"It is better to remember," said the sorns.
When Ransom asked if valuable secrets might not thus be lost, they replied that Oyarsa
always remembered them and would bring them to light if he thought fit.
"The hrossa used to have many books of poetry," they added. "But now they have fewer.
They say that the writing of books destroys poetry."
Their host in these caverns was attended by a number of other sorns who seemed to be in
some way subordinate to him; Ransom thought at first that they were servants but decided later
that they were pupils or assistants.
The evening's conversation was not such as would interest a terrestrial reader, for the sorns
had determined that Ransom should not ask, but answer, questions. Their questioning was very
different from the rambling, imaginative inquiries of the hrossa. They worked systematically
from the geology of Earth to its present geography, and thence in turn to flora, fauna, human
history, languages, politics and arts. When they found that Ransom could tell them no more on
a given subject - and this happened pretty soon in most of their inquiries - they dropped it at
once and went on to the next. Often they drew out of him indirectly much more knowledge
than he consciously possessed, apparently working from a wide background of general science.
A casual remark about trees when Ransom was trying to explain the manufacture of paper
would fill up for them a gap in his sketchy answers to their botanical questions; his account of
terrestrial navigation might illuminate mineralogy; and his description of the steam engine gave
them a better knowledge of terrestrial air and water than Ransom had ever had. He had decided
from the outset that he would be quite frank, for he now felt that it would be not hnau, and also
that it would be unavailing, to do otherwise. They were astonished at what he had to tell them
of human history - of war, slavery and prostitution.
"It is because they have no Oyarsa," said one of the pupils.
"It is because every one of them wants to be a little Oyarsa himself," said Augray.
"They cannot help it," said the old sorn. "There must be rule, yet how can creatures rule
themselves? Beasts must be ruled by hnau and hnau by eldila and eldila by Maleldil. These
creatures have no eldila. They are like one trying to lift himself by his own hair - or one trying
to see over a whole country when he is on a level with it - like a female trying to beget young
on herself."
Two things about our world particularly stuck in their minds. One was the extraordinary
degree to which problems of lifting and carrying things absorbed our energy. The other was the
fact that we had only one kind of hnau: they thought this must have far-reaching effects in the
narrowing of sympathies and even of thought.
"Your thought must be at the mercy of your blood," said the old sorn. "For you cannot
compare it with thought that floats on a different blood."
It was a tiring and very disagreeable conversation for Ransom. But when at last he lay down
to sleep it was not of the human nakedness nor of his own ignorance that he was thinking. He
thought only of the old forests of Malacandra and of what it might mean to grow up seeing
always so few miles away a land of colour that could never be reached and had once been
inhabited.
XVII
EARLY NEXT day Ransom again took his seat on Augray's shoulder. For more than an hour
they travelled through the same bright wilderness. Far to the north the sky was luminous with a
cloud-like mass of dull red or ochre; it was very large and drove furiously westward about ten
miles above the waste. Ransom, who had yet seen no cloud in the Malacandrian sky, asked
what it was. The sorn told him it was sand caught up from the great northern deserts by the
winds of that terrible country. It was often thus carried, sometimes at a height of seventeen
miles, to fall again, perhaps in a handramit, as a choking and blinding dust storm. The sight of
it moving with menace in the naked sky served to remind Ransom that they were indeed on the
outside of Malacandra - no longer dwelling in a world but crawling the surface of a strange
planet. At last the cloud seemed to drop and burst far on the western horizon, where a glow,
not unlike that of a conflagration, remained visible until a turn of the valley hid all that region
from his view.
The same turn opened a new prospect to his eyes. What lay before him looked at first
strangely like an earthly landscape - a landscape of grey downland ridges rising and falling like
waves of the sea. Far beyond, cliffs and spires of the familiar green rock rose against the dark
blue sky. A moment later he saw that what he had taken for downlands was but the ridged and
furrowed surface of a blue-grey valley mist - a mist which would not appear a mist at all when
they descended into the handramit. And already, as their road began descending, it was less
visible and the many-coloured pattern of the low country showed vaguely through it. The
descent grew quickly steeper; like the jagged teeth of a giant - a giant with very bad teeth - the
topmost peaks of the mountain wall down which they must pass loomed up over the edge of
their gulley. The look of the sky and the quality of the light were infinitesimally changed. A
moment later they stood on the edge of such a slope as by earthly standards would rather be
called a precipice; down and down this face, to where it vanished in a purple blush of
vegetation, ran their road. Ransom refused absolutely to make the descent on Augray's
shoulder. The sorn, though it did not fully understand his objection, stooped for him to
dismount, and proceeded, with that same skating and forward sloping motion, to go down
before him. Ransom followed, using gladly but stiffly his numb legs.
The beauty of this new handramit as it opened before him took his breath away. It was
wider than that in which he had hitherto lived and right below him lay an almost circular lake -
a sapphire twelve miles in diameter set in a border of purple forest. Amidst the lake there rose
like a low and gently sloping pyramid, or like a woman's breast, an island of pale red, smooth to
the summit, and on the summit a grove of such trees as man had never seen. Their smooth
columns had the gentle swell of the noblest beech trees: but these were taller than a cathedral
spire on earth, and at their tops they broke rather into flower than foliage; into golden flower
bright as tulip, still as rock, and huge as summer cloud. Flowers indeed they were, not trees,
and far down among their roots he caught a pale hint of slab-like architecture. He knew before
his guide told him that this was Meldilorn. He did not know what he had expected. The old
dreams which he had brought from earth of some more than American complexity of offices or
some engineers' paradise of vast machines had indeed been long laid aside. But he had not
looked for anything quite so classic, so virginal, as this bright grove - lying so still, so secret, in
its coloured valley, soaring with inimitable grace so many hundred feet into the wintry sunlight.
At every step of his descent the comparative warmth of the valley came up to him more
deliciously. He looked above - the sky was turning to a paler blue. He looked below - and
sweet and faint the thin fragrance of the giant blooms came up to him. Distant crags were
growing less sharp in outline, and surfaces less bright. Depth, dimness, softness and
perspective were returning to the landscape. The lip or edge of rock from which they had
started their descent was already far overhead; it seemed unlikely that they had really come
from there. He was breathing freely. His toes, so long benumbed could move delightfully
inside his boots. He lifted the ear-flaps of his cap and found his ears instantly filled with the
sound of falling water. And now he was treading on soft groundweed over level earth and the
forest roof was above his head. They had conquered the harandra and were on the threshold of
Meldilorn.
A short walk brought them into a kind of forest 'ride' - a broad avenue running straight as an
arrow through the purple stems to where the rigid blue of the lake danced at the end of it. There
they found a gong and hammer hung on a pillar of stone. These objects were all richly
decorated, and the gong and hammer were of a greenish-blue metal which Ransom did not
recognize. Augray struck the gong. An excitement was rising in Ransom's mind which almost
prevented him from examining as coolly as he wished the ornamentation of the stone. It was
partly pictorial, partly pure decoration. What chiefly struck him was a certain balance of
packed and empty surfaces. Pure line drawings, as bare as the prehistoric pictures of reindeer
on Earth, alternated with patches of design as close and intricate as Norse or Celtic jewellery;
and then, as you looked at it, these empty and crowded areas turned out to be themselves
arranged in larger designs. He was struck by the fact that the pictorial work was not confined to
the emptier spaces; quite often large arabesques included as a subordinate detail intricate
pictures. Elsewhere the opposite plan had been followed - and this alternation, too, had a
rhythmical or patterned element in it. He was just beginning to find out that the pictures,
though stylized, were obviously intended to tell a story, when Augray interrupted him. A ship
had put out from the island shore of Meldilorn.
As it came towards them Ransom's heart warmed to see that it was paddled by a hross. The
creature brought its boat up to the shore where they were waiting, stared at Ransom and then
looked inquiringly at Augray.
"You may well wonder at this nau, Hrinha," said the sorn, "for you have never seen anything
like it. It is called Ren-soom and has come through heaven from Thulcandra."
"It is welcome, Augray," said the hross politely. "Is it coming to Oyarsa?"
"He has sent for it."
"And for you also, Augray?"
"Oyarsa has not called me. If you will take Ren-soom over the water, I will go back to my
tower."
The hross indicated that Ransom should enter the boat. He attempted to express his thanks
to the sorn and after a moment's consideration unstrapped his wrist watch and offered it to him;
it was the only thing he had which seemed a suitable present for a sorn. He had no difficulty in
making Augray understand its purpose; but after examining it the giant gave it back to him, a
little reluctantly, and said:
"This gift ought to be given to a pfifltrigg. It rejoices my heart, but they would make more
of it. You are likely to meet some of the busy people in Meldilorn: give it to them. As for its
use, do your people not know except by looking at this thing how much of the day has worn?"
"I believe there are beasts that have a sort of knowledge of that," said Ransom, "but our hnau
have lost it."
After this, his farewells to the sorn were made and he embarked. To be once more in a boat
and with a hross, to feel the warmth of water on his face and to see a blue sky above him, was
almost like coming home. He took off his cap and leaned back luxuriously in the bows, plying
his escort with questions. He learned that the hrossa were not specially concerned with the
service of Oyarsa, as he had surmised from finding a hross in charge of the ferry: three species
of hnau served him in their various capacities, and the ferry was naturally entrusted to those
who understood boats. He learned that his own procedure on arriving in Meldilorn must be to
go where he liked and do what he pleased until Oyarsa called for him. It might be an hour or
several days before this happened. He would find huts near the landing place where he could
sleep if necessary and where food would be given him. In return he related as much as he could
make intelligible of his own world and his journey from it; and he warned the hross of the
dangerous bent men who had brought him and who were still at large on Malacandra. As he
did so, it occurred to him that he had not made this sufficiently clear to Augray; but he consoled
himself with the reflection that Weston and Devine seemed to have already some liaison with
the sorns and that they would not be likely to molest things so large and so comparatively manlike.
At any rate, not yet. About Devine's ultimate designs he had no illusions; all he could do
was to make a clean breast of them to Oyarsa. And now the ship touched land.
Ransom rose, while the hross was making fast, and looked about him. Close to the little
harbour which they had entered, and to the left, were low buildings of stone - the first he had
seen in Malacandra - and fires were burning. There, the hross told him, he could find food and
shelter. For the rest the island seemed desolate, and its smooth slopes empty up to the grove
that crowned them, where, again, he saw stonework. But this appeared to be neither temple nor
house in the human sense, but a broad avenue of monoliths - a much larger Stonehenge, stately,
empty and vanishing over the crest of the hill into the pale shadow of the flower-trunks. All
was solitude; but as he gazed upon it he seemed to hear, against the background of morning
silence, a faint, continual agitation of silvery sound - hardly a sound at all, if you attended to it,
and yet impossible to ignore.
"The island is all full of eldila," said the hross in a hushed voice.
He went ashore. As though half expecting some obstacle, he took a few hesitant paces
forward and stopped, and then went on again in the same fashion.
Though the groundweed was unusually soft and rich and his feet made no noise upon it, he
felt an impulse to walk on tiptoes. All his movements became gentle and sedate. The width of
water about this island made the air warmer than any he had yet breathed in Malacandra; the
climate was almost that of a warm earthly day in late September - a day that is warm but with a
hint of frost to come. The sense of awe which was increasing upon him deterred him from
approaching the crown of the hill, the grove and the avenue of standing stones.
He ceased ascending about half way up the hill and began walking to his right, keeping a
constant distance from the shore. He said to himself that he was having a look at the island, but
his feeling was rather that the island was having a look at him. This was greatly increased by a
discovery he made after he had been walking for about an hour, and which he ever afterwards
found great difficulty in describing. In the most abstract terms it might be summed up by
saying that the surface of the island was subject to tiny variations of light and shade which no
change in the sky accounted for. If the air had not been calm and the groundweed too short and
firm to move in the wind, he would have said that a faint breeze was playing with it, and
working such slight alterations in the shading as it does in a cornfield on the Earth. Like the
silvery noises in the air, these footsteps of light were shy of observation. Where he looked
hardest they were least to be seen: on the edges of his field of vision they came crowding as
though a complex arrangement of them were there in progress. To attend to any one of them
was to make it invisible, and the minute brightness seemed often to have just left the spot where
his eyes fell. He had no doubt that he was 'seeing' - as much as he ever would see - the eldila.
The sensation it produced in him was curious. It was not exactly uncanny, not as if he were
surrounded by ghosts. It was not even as if he were being spied upon: he had rather the sense of
being looked at by things that had a right to look. His feeling was less than fear; it had in it
something of embarrassment, something of shyness, something of submission, and it was
profoundly uneasy.
He felt tired and thought that in this favoured land it would be warm enough to rest out of
doors. He sat down. The softness of the weed, the warmth and the sweet smell which pervaded
the whole island, reminded him of Earth and gardens in summer. He closed his eyes for a
moment; then he opened them again and noticed buildings below him, and over the lake he saw
a boat approaching. Recognition suddenly came to him. That was the ferry, and these
buildings were the guesthouse beside the harbour; he had walked all round the island. A certain
disappointment succeeded this discovery. He was beginning to feel hungry. Perhaps it would
be a good plan to go down and ask for some food; at any rate it would pass the time.
But he did not do so. When he rose and looked more closely at the guest-house he saw a
considerable stir of creatures about it, and while he watched he saw that a full load of
passengers was landing from the ferry-boat. In the lake he saw some moving objects which he
did not at first identify but which turned out to be sorns up to their middles in the water and
obviously wading to Meldilorn from the mainland. There were about ten of them. For some
reason or other the island was receiving an influx of visitors. He no longer supposed that any
harm would be done to him if he went down and mixed in the crowd, but he felt a reluctance to
do so. The situation brought vividly back to his mind his experience as a new boy at school -
new boys came a day early - hanging about and watching the arrival of the old hands. In the
end he decided not to go down. He cut and ate some of the groundweed and dozed for a little.
In the afternoon, when it grew colder, he resumed his walking. Other hnau were roaming
about the island by this time. He saw sorns chiefly, but this was because their height made
them conspicuous. There was hardly any noise. His reluctance to meet these fellow-wanderers,
who seemed to confine themselves to the coast of the island, drove him half consciously
upwards and inwards. He found himself at last on the fringes of the grove and looking straight
up the monolithic avenue. He had intended, for no very clearly defined reason, not to enter it,
but he fell to studying the stone nearest to him, which was richly sculptured on all its four sides,
and after that curiosity led him on from stone to stone.
The pictures were very puzzling. Side by side with representations of sorns and hrossa and
what he supposed to be pfifltriggi there occurred again and again an upright wavy figure with
only the suggestion of a face, and with wings. The wings were perfectly recognizable, and this
puzzled him very much. Could it be that the traditions of Malacandrian art went back to that
earlier geological and biological era when, as Augray had told him, there was life, including
bird-life, on the harandra? The answer of the stones seemed to be Yes. He saw pictures of the
old red forests with unmistakable birds flying among them, and many other creatures that he did
not know. On another stone many of these were represented lying dead, and a fantastic hnakralike
figure, presumably symbolizing the cold, was depicted in the sky above them shooting at
them with darts. Creatures still alive were crowding round the winged, wavy figure, which he
took to be Oyarsa, pictured as a winged flame. On the next stone Oyarsa appeared, followed by
many creatures, and apparently making a furrow with some pointed instrument. Another
picture showed the furrow being enlarged by pfifltriggi with digging tools. Sorns were piling
the earth up in pinnacles on each side, and hrossa seemed to be making water channels.
Ransom wondered whether this were a mythical account of the making of handramits or
whether they were conceivably artificial in fact.
Many of the pictures he could make nothing of. One that particularly puzzled him showed at
the bottom a segment of a circle, behind and above which rose three-quarters of a disk divided
into concentric rings. He thought it was a picture of the sun rising behind a hill; certainly the
segment at the bottom was full of Malacandrian scenes - Oyarsa in Meldilorn, sorns on the
mountain edge of the harandra, and many other things both familiar to him and strange. He
turned from it to examine the disk which rose behind it. It was not the sun. The sun was there,
unmistakably, at the centre of the disk: round this the concentric circles revolved. In the first
and smallest of these was pictured a little ball, on which rode a winged figure something like
Oyarsa, but holding what appeared to be a trumpet. In the next, a similar ball carried another of
the flaming figures. This one, instead of even the suggested face, had two bulges which after
long inspection he decided were meant to be the udders or breasts of a female mammal. By this
time he was quite sure that he was looking at a picture of the solar system. The first ball was
Mercury, the second Venus - 'And what an extraordinary coincidence,' thought Ransom, 'that
their mythology, like ours, associates some idea of the female with Venus.' The problem would
have occupied him longer if a natural curiosity had not drawn his eyes on to the next ball which
must represent the Earth. When he saw it, his whole mind stood still for a moment. The ball
was there, but where the flame-like figure should have been, a deep depression of irregular
shape had been cut as if to erase it. Once, then - but his speculations faltered and became silent
before a series of unknowns. He looked at the next circle. Here there was no ball. Instead, the
bottom of this circle touched the top of the big segment filled with Malacandrian scenes, so that
Malacandra at this point touched the solar system and came out of it in perspective towards the
spectator. Now that his mind had grasped the design, he was astonished at the vividness of it
all. He stood back and drew a deep breath preparatory to tackling some of the mysteries in
which he was engulfed. Malacandra, then, was Mars. The Earth - but at this point a sound of
tapping or hammering, which had been going on for some time without gaining admission to
his consciousness, became too insistent to be ignored. Some creature, and certainly not an eldil,
was at work, close to him. A little startled - for he had been deep in thought - he turned round.
There was nothing to be seen. He shouted out, idiotically, in English:
"Who's there?"
The tapping instantly stopped and a remarkable face appeared from behind a neighbouring
monolith.
It was hairless like a man's or a sorn's. It was long and pointed like a shrew's, yellow and
shabby-looking, and so low in the forehead that but for the heavy development of the head at
the back and behind the ears (like a bag-wig) it could not have been that of an intelligent
creature. A moment later the whole of the thing came into view with a startling jump. Ransom
guessed that it was a pfifltrigg - and was glad that he had not met one of this third race on his
first arrival in Malacandra. It was much more insect-like or reptilian than anything he had yet
seen. Its build was distinctly that of a frog, and at first Ransom thought it was resting, frog-like,
on its 'hands.' Then he noticed that that part of its fore-limbs on which it was supported was
really, in human terms, rather an elbow than a hand. It was broad and padded and clearly made
to be walked on; but upwards from it, at an angle of about forty-five degrees, went the true
forearms - thin, strong forearms, ending in enormous, sensitive, many-fingered hands. He
realized that for all manual work from mining to cutting cameos this creature had the advantage
of being able to work with its full strength from a supported elbow. The insect-like effect was
due to the speed and jerkiness of its movements and to the fact that it could swivel its head
almost all the way round like a mantis; and it was increased by a kind of dry, rasping, jingling
quality in the noise of its moving. It was rather like a grasshopper, rather like one of Arthur
Rackham's dwarfs, rather like a frog, and rather like a little old taxidermist whom Ransom
knew in London.
"I come from another world," began Ransom.
"I know, I know," said the creature in a quick, twittering, rather impatient voice. "Come
here, behind the stone. This way, this way. Oyarsa's orders. Very busy. Must begin at once.
Stand there."
Ransom found himself on the other side of the monolith, staring at a picture which was still
in process of completion. The ground was liberally strewn with chips and the air was full of
dust.
"There," said the creature. "Stand still. Don't look at me. Look over there."
For a moment Ransom did not quite understand what was expected of him; then, as he saw
the pfifltrigg glancing to and fro at him and at the stone with the unmistakable glance of artist
from model to work which is the same in all worlds, he realized and almost laughed. He was
standing for his portrait! From his position he could see that the creature was cutting the stone
as if it were cheese and the swiftness of its movements almost baffled his eyes, but he could get
no impression of the work done, though he could study the pfifltrigg. He saw that the jingling
and metallic noise was due to the number of small instruments which it carried about its body.
Sometimes, with an exclamation of annoyance, it would throw down the tool it was working
with and select one of these; but the majority of those in immediate use it kept in its mouth. He
realized also that this was an animal artificially clothed like himself, in some bright scaly
substance which appeared richly decorated though coated in dust. It had folds of furry clothing
about its throat like a comforter, and its eyes were protected by dark bulging goggles. Rings -
and chains of a bright metal - not gold, he thought - adorned its limbs and neck. All the time it
was working it kept up a sort of hissing whisper to itself; and when it was excited - which it
usually was - the end of its nose wrinkled like a rabbit's. At last it gave another startling leap,
landed about ten yards away from its work, and said:
"Yes, yes. Not so good as I hoped. Do better another time. Leave it now. Come and see
yourself."
Ransom obeyed. He saw a picture of the planets, not now arranged to make a map of the
solar system, but advancing in a single procession towards the spectator, and all, save one,
bearing its fiery charioteer. Below lay Malacandra and there, to his surprise, was a very
tolerable picture of the space-ship. Beside it stood three figures for all of which Ransom had
apparently been the model. He recoiled from them in disgust. Even allowing for the
strangeness of the subject from a Malacandrian point of view and for the stylization of their art,
still, he thought, the creature might have made a better attempt at the human form than these
stock-like dummies, almost as thick as they were tall, and sprouting about the head and neck
into something that looked like fungus.
He hedged. "I expect it is like me as I look to your people," he said. "It is not how they
would draw me in my own world."
"No," said the pfifltrigg. "I do not mean it to be too like. Too like, and they will not believe
it - those who are born after." He added a good deal more which was difficult to understand; but
while he was speaking it dawned upon Ransom that the odious figures were intended as an
idealization of humanity. Conversation languished for a little. To change the subject Ransom
asked a question which had been in his mind for some time.
"I cannot understand," he said, "how you and the sorns and the hrossa all come to speak the
same speech. For your tongues and teeth and throats must be very different."
"You are right," said the creature. "Once we all had different speeches and we still have at
home. But everyone has learned the speech of the hrossa."
"Why is that?" said Ransom, still thinking in terms of terrestrial history. "Did the hrossa
once rule the others?"
"I do not understand. They are our great speakers and singers. They have more words and
better. No one learns the speech of my people, for what we have to say is said in stone and
suns' blood and stars' milk and all can see them. No one learns the sorns' speech, for you can
change their knowledge into any words and it is still the same. You cannot do that with the
songs of the hrossa. Their tongue goes all over Malacandra. I speak it to you because you are a
stranger. I would speak it to a sorn. But we have our old tongues at home. You can see it in the
names. The sorns have big-sounding names like Augray and Arkal and Belma and Falmay.
The hrossa have furry names like Hnoh and Hnihi and Hyoi and Hlithnahi."
"The best poetry, then, comes in the roughest speech?"
"Perhaps," said the pfifltrigg. "As the best pictures are made in the hardest stone. But my
people have names like Kalakaperi and Parakataru and Tafalakeruf. I am called
Kanakaberaka."
Ransom told it his name.
"In our country," said Kanakaberaka, "it is not like this. We are not pinched in a narrow
handramit. There are the true forests, the green shadows, the deep mines. It is warm. It does
not blaze with light like this, and it is not silent like this. I could put you in a place there in the
forests where you could see a hundred fires at once and hear a hundred hammers. I wish you
had come to our country. We do not live in holes like the sorns nor in bundles of weed like the
hrossa. I could show you houses with a hundred pillars, one of suns' blood and the next of stars'
milk, all the way ... and all the world painted on the walls."
"How do you rule yourselves?" asked Ransom. "Those who are digging in the mines - do
they like it as much as those who paint the walls?"
"All keep the mines open; it is a work to be shared. But each digs for himself the thing he
wants for his work. What else would he do?"
"It is not so with us."
"Then you must make very bent work. How would a maker understand working in suns'
blood unless he went into the home of suns' blood himself and knew one kind from another and
lived with it for days out of the light of the sky till it was in his blood and his heart, as if he
thought it and ate it and spat it?"
"With us it lies very deep and hard to get and those who dig it must spend their whole lives
on the skill."
"And they love it?"
"I think not ... I do not know. They are kept at it because they are given no food if they
stop."
Kanakaberaka wrinkled his nose. "Then there is not food in plenty on your world?"
"I do not know," said Ransom. "I have often wished to know the answer to that question but
no one can tell me. Does no one keep your people at their work, Kanakaberaka ?"
"Our females," said the pfifltrigg with a piping noise which was apparently his equivalent for
a laugh.
"Are your females of more account among you than those of the other hnau among them?"
"Very greatly. The sorns make least account of females and we make most."
THAT NIGHT Ransom slept in the guesthouse, which was a real house built by pfifltriggi and
richly decorated. His pleasure at finding himself, in this respect, under more human conditions
was qualified by the discomfort which, despite his reason, he could not help feeling in the
presence at close quarters, of so many Malacandrian creatures. All three species were
represented. They seemed to have no uneasy feelings towards each other, though there were
some differences of the kind that occur in a railway carriage on Earth - the sorns finding the
house too hot and the pfifltriggi finding it too cold. He learned more of Malacandrian humour
and of the noises that expressed it in this one night than he had learned during the whole of his
life on the strange planet hitherto. Indeed, nearly all Malacandrian conversations in which he
had yet taken part had been grave. Apparently the comic spirit arose chiefly from the meeting
of the different kinds of hnau. The jokes of all three were equally incomprehensible to him. He
thought he could see differences in kind - as that the sorns seldom got beyond irony, while the
hrossa were extravagant and fantastic, and the pfifltriggi were sharp and excelled in abuse - but
even when he understood all the words he could not see the points. He went early to bed.
It was at the time of early morning, when men on Earth go out to milk the cows, that
Ransom was wakened. At first he did not know what had roused him. The chamber in which
he lay was silent, empty and nearly dark. He was preparing himself to sleep again when a highpitched
voice close beside him said, "Oyarsa sends for you." He sat up, staring about him.
There was no one there, and the voice repeated, "Oyarsa sends for you." The confusion of sleep
was now clearing in his head, and he recognized that there was an eldil in the room. He felt no
conscious fear, but while he rose obediently and put on such of his clothes as he had laid aside
he found that his heart was beating rather fast. He was thinking less of the invisible creature in
the room than of the interview that lay before him. His old terrors of meeting some monster or
idol had quite left him: he felt nervous as he remembered feeling on the morning of an
examination when he was an undergraduate. More than anything in the world he would have
liked a cup of good tea.
The guest-house was empty. He went out. The bluish smoke was rising from the lake and
the sky was bright behind the jagged eastern wall of the canyon; it was a few minutes before
sunrise. The air was still very cold, the groundweed drenched with dew, and there was
something puzzling about the whole scene which he presently identified with the silence. The
eldil voices in the air had ceased and so had the shifting network of small lights and shades.
Without being told, he knew that it was his business to go up to the crown of the island and the
grove. As he approached them he saw with a certain sinking of heart that the monolithic
avenue was full of Malacandrian creatures, and all silent. They were in two lines, one on each
side, and all squatting or sitting in the various fashions suitable to their anatomies. He walked
on slowly and doubtfully, not daring to stop, and ran the gauntlet of all those inhuman and
unblinking eyes. When he had come to the very summit, at the middle of the avenue where the
biggest of the stones rose, he stopped - he never could remember afterwards whether an eldil
voice had told him to do, so or whether it was an intuition of his own. He did not sit down, for
the earth was too cold and wet and he was not sure if it would be decorous. He simply stood -
motionless like a man on parade. All the creatures were looking at him and there was no noise
anywhere.
He perceived, gradually, that the place was full of eldila. The lights, or suggestions of light,
which yesterday had been scattered over the island, were now all congregated in this one spot,
and were all stationary or very faintly moving. The sun had risen by now, and still no one
spoke. As he looked up to see the first, pale sunlight upon the monoliths, he became conscious
that the air above him was full of a far greater complexity of light than the sunrise could
explain, and light of a different kind, eldil-light. The sky, no less than the earth, was full of
them; the visible Malacandrians were but the smallest part of the silent consistory which
surrounded him. He might, when the time came, be pleading his cause before thousands or
before millions: rank behind, rank about him, and rank above rank over his head, the creatures
that had never yet seen man and whom man could not see, were waiting for his trial to begin.
He licked his lips, which were quite dry, and wondered if he would be able to speak when
speech was demanded of him. Then it occurred to him that perhaps this - this waiting and being
looked at - was the trial; perhaps even now he was unconsciously telling them all they wished
to know. But afterwards - a long time afterwards - there was a noise of movement. Every
visible creature in the grove had risen to its feet and was standing, more hushed than ever, with
its head bowed; and Ransom saw (if it could be called seeing) that Oyarsa was coming up
between the long lines of sculptured stones. Partly he knew it from the faces of the
Malacandrians as their lord passed them; partly he saw - he could not deny that he saw - Oyarsa
himself. He never could say what it was like. The merest whisper of light - no, less than that,
the smallest diminution of shadow - was travelling along the uneven surface of the ground
weed; or rather some difference in the look of the ground, too slight to be named in the
language of the five senses, moved slowly towards him. Like a silence spreading over a room
full of people, like an infinitesimal coolness on a sultry day, like a passing memory of some
long-forgotten sound or scent, like all that is stillest and smallest and most hard to seize in
nature, Oyarsa passed between his subjects and drew near and came to rest, not ten yards away
from Ransom, in the centre of Meldilorn. Ransom felt a tingling of his blood and a prickling on
his fingers as if lightning were near him; and his heart and body seemed to him to be made of
water.
Oyarsa spoke - a more unhuman voice than Ransom had yet heard, sweet and seemingly
remote; an unshaken voice: a voice, as one of the hrossa afterwards said to Ransom, "with no
blood in it. Light is instead of blood for them." The words were not alarming.
"What are you so afraid of, Ransom of Thulcandra?" it said.
"Of you, Oyarsa, because you are unlike me and I cannot see you."
"Those are not great reasons," said the voice. "You are also unlike me, and, though I see
you, I see you very faintly. But do not think we are utterly unlike. We are both copies of
Maleldil. These are not the real reasons."
Ransom said nothing.
"You began to be afraid of me before you set foot in my world. And you have spent all your
time since then in flying from me. My servants saw your fear when you were in your ship in
heaven. They saw that your own kind treated you ill, though they could not understand their
speech. Then to deliver you out of the hands of those two I stirred up a hnakra to try if you
would come to me of your own will. But you hid among the hrossa and though they told you to
come to me, you would not. After that I sent my eldil to fetch you, but still you would not
come. And in the end your own kind have chased you to me, and hnau's blood has been shed."
"I do not understand, Oyarsa. Do you mean that it was you who sent for me from
Thulcandra?"
"Yes. Did not the other two tell you this? And why did you come with them unless you
meant to obey my call? My servants could not understand their talk to you when your ship was
in heaven."
"Your servants ... I cannot understand," said Ransom.
"Ask freely," said the voice.
"Have you servants out in the heavens?"
"Where else? There is nowhere else."
"But you, Oyarsa, are here on Malacandra, as I am."
"But Malacandra, like all worlds, floats in heaven. And I am not 'here' altogether as you are,
Ransom of Thulcandra. Creatures of your kind must drop out of heaven into a world; for us the
worlds are places in heaven. But do not try to understand this now. It is enough to know that I
and my servants are even now in heaven; they were around you in the sky-ship no less than they
are around you here."
"Then you knew of our journey before we left Thulcandra ?"
"No. Thulcandra is the world we do not know. It alone is outside the heaven, and no
message comes from it."
Ransom was silent, but Oyarsa answered his unspoken questions.
"It was not always so. Once we knew the Oyarsa of your world - he was brighter and greater
than I - and then we did not call it Thulcandra. It is the longest of all stories and the bitterest.
He became bent. That was before any life came on your world. Those were the Bent Years of
which we still speak in the heavens, when he was not yet bound to Thulcandra but free like us.
It was in his mind to spoil other worlds besides his own. He smote your moon with his left
hand and with his right he brought the cold death on my harandra before its time; if by my arm
Maleldil had not opened the handramits and let out the hot springs, my world would have been
unpeopled. We did not leave him so at large for long. There was great war, and we drove him
back out of the heavens and bound him in the air of his own world as Maleldil taught us. There
doubtless he lies to this hour, and we know no more of that planet: it is silent. We think that
Maleldil would not give it up utterly to the Bent One, and there are stones among us that He has
taken strange counsel and dared terrible things, wrestling with the Bent One in Thulcandra. But
of this we know less than you; it is a thing we desire to look into."
It was some time before Ransom spoke again and Oyarsa respected his silence. When he
had collected himself he said:
"After this story, Oyarsa, I may tell you that our world is very bent. The two who brought
me knew nothing of you, but only that the sorns had asked for me. They thought you were a
false eldil, I think. There are false eldila in the wild parts of our world; men kill other men
before them - they think the eldil drinks blood. They thought the sorns wanted me for this or
for some other evil. They brought me by force. I was in terrible fear. The tellers of tales in our
world make us think that if there is any life beyond our own air, it is evil."
"I understand," said the voice. "And this explains things that I have wondered at. As soon
as your journey had passed your own air and entered heaven, my servants told me that you
seemed to be coming unwillingly and that the others had secrets from you. I did not think any
creature could be so bent as to bring another of its own kind here by force."
"They did not know what you wanted me for, Oyarsa. Nor do I know yet."
"I will tell you. Two years ago - and that is about four of your years - this ship entered the
heavens from your world. We followed its journey all the way hither and eldila were with it as
it sailed over the harandra, and when at last it came to rest in the handramit more than half my
servants were standing round it to see the strangers come out. All beasts we kept back from the
place, and no hnau yet knew of it. When the strangers had walked to and fro on Malacandra
and made themselves a hut and their fear of a new world ought to have worn off, I sent certain
sorns to show themselves and to teach the strangers our language. I chose sorns because they
are most like your people in form. The Thulcandrians feared the sorns and were very
unteachable. The sorns went to them many times and taught them a little. They reported to me
that the Thulcandrians were taking suns' blood wherever they could find it in the streams.
When I could make nothing of them by report, I told the sorns to bring them to me, not by force
but courteously. They would not come. I asked for one of them, but not even one of them
would come. It would have been easy to take them; but though we saw they were stupid we did
not know yet how bent they were, and I did not wish to stretch my authority beyond the
creatures of my own world. I told the sorns to treat them like cubs, to tell them that they would
be allowed to pick up no more of the suns' blood until one of their race came to me. When they
were told this they stuffed as much as they could into the sky-ship and went back to their own
world. We wondered at this, but now it is plain. They thought I wanted one of your race to eat
and went to fetch one. If they had come a few miles to see me I would have received them
honourably; now they have twice gone a voyage of millions of miles for nothing and will
appear before me none the less. And you also, Ransom of Thulcandra, you have taken many
vain troubles to avoid standing where you stand now."
"'I'hat is true, Oyarsa. Bent creatures are full of fears. But I am here now and ready to know
your will with me."
"Two things I wanted to ask of your race. First I must know why you come here - so much is
my duty to my world. And secondly I wish to hear of Thulcandra and of Maleldil's strange wars
there with the Bent One; for that, as I have said, is a thing we desire to look into."
"For the first question, Oyarsa, I have come here because I was brought. Of the others, one
cares for nothing but the suns' blood, because in our world he can exchange it for many
pleasures and powers. But the other means evil to you. I think he would destroy all your people
to make room for our people; and then he would do the same with other worlds again. He
wants our race to last for always, I think, and he hopes they will leap from world to world...
always going to a new sun when an old one dies... or something like that."
"Is he wounded in his brain?"
"I do not know. Perhaps I do not describe his thoughts right. He is more learned than I."
"Does he think he could go to the great worlds? Does he think Maleldil wants a race to live
for ever?"
"He does not know there is any Maleldil. But what is certain, Oyarsa, is that he means evil
to your world. Our kind must not be allowed to come here again. If you can prevent it only by
killing all three of us, I am content."
"If you were my own people I would kill them now, Ransom, and you soon; for they are bent
beyond hope, and you, when you have grown a little braver, will be ready to go to Maleldil.
But my authority is over my own world. It is a terrible thing to kill someone else's hnau. It will
not be necessary."
"They are strong, Oyarsa, and they can throw death many miles and can blow killing airs at
their enemies."
"The least of my servants could touch their ship before it reached Malacandra, while it was
in the heaven, and make it a body of different movements - for you, no body at all. Be sure that
no one of your race will come into my world again unless I call him. But enough of this. Now
tell me of Thulcandra. Tell me all. We know nothing since the day when the Bent One sank
out of heaven into the air of your world, wounded in the very light of his light. But why have
you become afraid again?"
"I am afraid of the lengths of time, Oyarsa ... or perhaps I do not understand. Did you not
say this happened before there was life on Thulcandra?"
"Yes."
"And you, Oyarsa? You have lived ... and that picture on the stone where the cold is killing
them on the harandra ? Is that a picture of something that was before my world began?"
"I see you are hnau after all," said the voice. "Doubtless no stone that faced the air then
would be a stone now. The picture has begun to crumble away and been copied again more
times than there are eldila in the air above us. But it was copied right. In that way you are
seeing a picture that was finished when your world was still half made. But do not think of
these things. My people have a law never to speak much of sizes or numbers to you others, not
even to sorns. You do not understand, and it makes you do reverence to nothings and pass by
what is really great. Rather tell me what Maleldil has done in Thulcandra."
"According to our traditions -" Ransom was beginning, when an unexpected disturbance
broke in upon the solemn stillness of the assembly. A large party, almost a procession, was
approaching the grove from the direction of the ferry. It consisted entirely, so far as he could
see, of hrossa, and they appeared to be carrying something.
XIX
AS THE procession drew nearer Ransom saw that the foremost hrossa were supporting three
long and narrow burdens. They carried them on their heads, four hrossa to each. After these
came a number of others armed with harpoons and apparently guarding two creatures which he
did not recognize. The light was behind them as they entered between the two farthest
monoliths. They were much shorter than any animal he had yet seen on Malacandra, and he
gathered that they were bipeds, though the lower limbs were so thick and sausage-like that he
hesitated to call them legs. The bodies were a little narrower at the top than at the bottom so as
to be very slightly pear-shaped, and the heads were neither round like those of hrossa nor long
like those of sorns, but almost square. They stumped along on narrow, heavy-looking feet
which they seemed to press into the ground with unnecessary violence. And now their faces
were becoming visible as masses of lumped and puckered flesh of variegated colour fringed in
some bristly, dark substance.... Suddenly, with an indescribable change of feeling, he realized
that he was looking at men. The two prisoners were Weston and Devine and he, for one
privileged moment, had seen the human form with almost Malacandrian eyes.
The leaders of the procession had now advanced to within a few yards of Oyarsa and laid
down their burdens. These, he now saw, were three dead hrossa laid on biers of some unknown
metal; they were on their backs and their eyes, not closed as we close the eyes of human dead,
stared disconcertingly up at the far-off golden canopy of the grove. One of them he took to be
Hyoi, and it was certainly Hyoi's brother, Hyahi, who now came forward, and after an obeisance
to Oyarsa began to speak.
Ransom at first did not hear what he was saying, for his attention was concentrated on
Weston and Devine. They were weaponless and vigilantly guarded by the armed hrossa about
them. Both of them, like Ransom himself, had let their beards grow ever since they landed on
Malacandra, and both were pale and travel stained. Weston was standing with folded arms, and
his face wore a fixed, even an elaborate, expression of desperation. Devine, with his hands in
his pockets, seemed to be in a state of furious sulks. Both clearly thought that they had good
reason to fear, though neither was by any means lacking in courage. Surrounded by their guards
as they were, and intent on the scene before them, they had not noticed Ransom.
He became aware of what Hyoi's brother was saying.
"For the death of these two, Oyarsa, I do not so much complain, for when we fell upon the
hmâna by night they were in terror. You may say it was as a hunt and these two were killed as
they might have been by a hnakra. But Hyoi they hit from afar with a coward's weapon when
he had done nothing to frighten them. And now he lies there (and I do not say it because he
was my brother, but all the handramit knows it) and he was a hnakrapunt and a great poet and
the loss of him is heavy."
The voice of Oyarsa spoke for the first time to the two men.
"Why have you killed my hnau?" it said.
Weston and Devine looked anxiously about them to identify the speaker.
"God!" exclaimed Devine in English. "Don't tell me they've got a loudspeaker."
"Ventriloquism," replied Weston in a husky whisper. "Quite common among savages. The
witch-doctor or medicine-man pretends to go into a trance and he does it. The thing to do is to
identify the medicine-man and address your remarks to him wherever the voice seems to come
from; it shatters his nerve and shows you've seen through him. Do you see any of the brutes in
a trance? By Jove - I've spotted him."
Due credit must be given to Weston for his powers of observation: he had picked out the
only creature in the assembly which was not standing in an attitude of reverence and attention.
This was an elderly hross close beside him. It was squatting; and its eyes were shut. Taking a
step towards it, he struck a defiant attitude and exclaimed in a loud voice (his knowledge of the
language was elementary):
"Why you take our puff-bangs away? We very angry with you. We not afraid."
On Weston's hypothesis his action ought to have been impressive. Unfortunately for him, no
one else shared his theory of the elderly hross's behaviour. The hross - who was well known to
all of them, including Ransom - had not come with the funeral procession. It had been in its
place since dawn. Doubtless it intended no disrespect to Oyarsa; but it must be confessed that it
had yielded, at a much earlier stage in the proceedings, to an infirmity which attacks elderly
hnau of all species, and was by this time enjoying a profound and refreshing slumber. One of
its whiskers twitched a little as Weston shouted in its face, but its eyes remained shut.
The voice of Oyarsa spoke again. "Why do you speak to him?" it said. "It is I who ask you,
Why have you killed my hnau?"
"'You let us go, then we talkee-talkee," bellowed Weston at the sleeping hross. "You think
we no power, think you do all you like. You no can. Great big headman in sky he send us.
You no do what I say, he come, blow you all up - Pouff! Bang!"
"I do not know what bang means," said the voice. "But why have you killed my hnau?"
"Say it was an accident," muttered Devine to Weston in English.
"I've told you before," replied Weston in the same language. "You don't understand how to
deal with natives. One sign of yielding and they'll be at our throats. The only thing is to
intimidate them."
"All right! Do your stuff, then," growled Devine. He was obviously losing faith in his
partner.
Weston cleared his throat and again rounded on the elderly hross.
"We kill him," he shouted. "Show what we can do. Every one who no do all we say - pouff!
bang! - kill him same as that one. You do all we say and we give you much pretty things. See!
See!" To Ransom's intense discomfort, Weston at this point whipped out of his pocket a
brightly coloured necklace of beads, the undoubted work of Mr Woolworth, and began dangling
it in front of the faces of his guards, turning slowly round and round and repeating, "Pretty,
pretty! See! See!"
The result of this manoeuvre was more striking than Weston himself had anticipated. Such a
roar of sounds as human ears had never heard before - baying of hrossa, piping of pfifltriggi,
booming of sorns - burst out and rent the silence of that august place, waking echoes from the
distant mountain walls. Even in the air above them there was a faint ringing of the eldil voices.
It is greatly to Weston's credit that though he paled at this he did not lose his nerve.
"You no rear at me," he thundered. "No try make me afraid. Me no afraid of you."
"You must forgive my people," said the voice of Oyarsa - and even it was subtly changed -
"but they are not roaring at you. They are only laughing."
But Weston did not know the Malacandrian word for laugh: indeed, it was not a word he
understood very well in any language. He looked about him with a puzzled expression.
Ransom, biting his lips with mortification, almost prayed that one experiment with the beads
would satisfy the scientist; but that was because he did not know Weston. The latter saw that
the clamour had subsided. He knew that he was following the most orthodox rules for
frightening and then conciliating primitive races; and he was not the man to be deterred by one
or two failures. The roar that went up from the throats of all spectators as he again began
revolving like a slow motion picture of a humming-top, occasionally mopping his brow with his
left hand and conscientiously jerking the necklace up and down with his right, completely
drowned anything he might be attempting to say; but Ransom saw his lips moving and had little
doubt that he was working away at "Pretty, pretty!" Then suddenly the sound of laughter almost
redoubled its volume. The stars in their courses were fighting against Weston. Some hazy
memory of efforts made long since to entertain an infant niece had begun to penetrate his highly
trained mind. He was bobbing up and down from the knees and holding his head on one side;
he was almost dancing; and he was by now very hot indeed. For all Ransom knew he was
saying "Diddle, diddle, diddle."
It was sheer exhaustion which ended the great physicist's performance - the most successful
of its kind ever given on Malacandra - and with it the sonorous raptures of his audience. As
silence returned Ransom heard Devine's voice in English:
"For God's sake stop making a buffoon of yourself, Weston," it said. "Can't you see it won't
work?"
"It doesn't seem to be working," admitted Weston, "and I'm inclined to think they have even
less intelligence than we supposed. Do you think, perhaps, if I tried it just once again - or
would you like to try this time?"
"Oh, Hell!" said Devine, and, turning his back on his partner, sat down abruptly on the
ground, produced his cigarette case and began to smoke.
"I'll give it to the witch-doctor," said Weston during the moment of silence which Devine's
action had produced among the mystified spectators; and before anyone could stop him he took
a step forward and attempted to drop the string of beads round the elderly hross's neck. The
hross's head was, however, too large for this operation and the necklace merely settled on its
forehead like a crown, slightly over one eye. It shifted its head a little, like a dog worried with
flies, snorted gently, and resumed its sleep.
Oyarsa's voice now addressed Ransom. "Are your fellow-creatures hurt in their brains,
Ransom of Thulcandra?", it said. "Or are they too much afraid to answer my questions?"
"I think, Oyarsa," said Ransom, "that they do not believe you are there. And they believe
that all these hnau are - are like very young cubs. The thicker hmân is trying to frighten them
and then to please them with gifts."
At the sound of Ransom's voice the two prisoners turned sharply around. Weston was about
to speak when Ransom interrupted him hastily in English:
"Listen, Weston. It is not a trick. There really is a creature there in the middle - there where
you can see a kind of light, or a kind of something, if you look hard. And it is at least as
intelligent as a man - they seem to live an enormous time. Stop treating it like a child and
answer its questions. And if you take my advice, you'll speak the truth and not bluster."
"The brutes seem to have intelligence enough to take you in, anyway," growled Weston; but
it was in a somewhat modified voice that he turned once more to the sleeping hross - the desire
to wake up the supposed witchdoctor was becoming an obsession - and addressed it.
"We sorry we kill him," he said, pointing to Hyoi. "No go to kill him. Sorns tell us bring
man, give him your big head. We got away back into sky. He come" (here he indicated
Ransom) "with us. He very bent man, run away, no do what sorns say like us. We run after
him, get him back for sorns, want to do what we say and sorns tell us, see? He not let us. Run
away, run, run. We run after. See a big black one, think he kill us, we kill him - pouff! bang!
All for bent man. He no run away, he be good, we no run after, no kill big black one, see? You
have bent man - bent man make all trouble - you plenty keep him, let us go. He afraid of you,
we no afraid. Listen -"
At this moment Weston's continual bellowing in the face of the hross at last produced the
effect he had striven for so long. The creature opened its eyes and stared mildly at him in some
perplexity. Then, gradually realizing the impropriety of which it had been guilty, it rose slowly
to its standing position, bowed respectfully to Oyarsa, and finally waddled out of the assembly
still carrying the necklace draped over its right ear and eye. Weston, his mouth still open,
followed the retreating figure with his gaze till it vanished among the stems of the grove.
It was Oyarsa who broke the silence. "We have had mirth enough," he said, "and it is time to
hear true answers to our questions. Something is wrong in your head, hnau from Thulcandra.
There is too much blood in it. Is Firikitekila here?"
"Here, Oyarsa," said a pfifltrigg.
"Have you in your cisterns water that has been made cold?"
"Yes, Oyarsa."
"Then let this thick hnau be taken to the guest-house and let them bathe his head in cold
water. Much water and many times. Then bring him again. Meanwhile I will provide for my
killed hrossa."
Weston did not clearly understand what the voice said - indeed, he was still too busy trying
to find out where it came from - but terror smote him as he found himself wrapped in the strong
arms of the surrounding hrossa and forced away from his place. Ransom would gladly have
shouted out some reassurance, but Weston himself was shouting too loud to hear him. He was
mixing English and Malacandrian now, and the last that was heard was a rising scream of "Pay
for this - pouff! bang! - Ransom, for God's sake - Ransom! Ransom!"
"And now," said Oyarsa, when silence was restored, "let us honour my dead hnau."
At his words ten of the hrossa grouped themselves about the biers. Lifting their heads, and
with no signal given as far as Ransom could see, they began to sing.
To every man, in his acquaintance with a new art, there comes a moment when that which
before was meaningless first lifts, as it were, one corner of the curtain that hides its mystery,
and reveals, in a burst of delight which later and fuller understanding can hardly ever equal, one
glimpse of the indefinite possibilities within. For Ransom, this moment had now come in his
understanding of Malacandrian song. Now first he saw that its rhythms were based on a
different blood from ours, on a heart that beat more quickly, and a fiercer internal heat.
Through his knowledge of the creatures and his love for them he began, ever so little, to hear it
with their ears. A sense of great masses moving at visionary speeds, of giants dancing, of
eternal sorrows eternally consoled, of he knew not what and yet what he had always known,
awoke in him with the very first bars of the deep-mouthed dirge, and bowed down his spirit as
if the gate of heaven had opened before him.
"Let it go hence," they sang. "Let it go hence, dissolve and be no body. Drop it, release it,
drop it gently, as a stone is loosed from fingers drooping over a still pool. Let it go down, sink,
fall away. Once below the surface there are no divisions, no layers in the water yielding all the
way down; all one and all unwounded is that element. Send it voyaging; it will not come again.
Let it go down; the hnau rises from it. This is the second life, the other beginning. Open, oh
coloured world, without weight, without shore. You are second and better; this was first and
feeble. Once the worlds were hot within and brought forth life, but only the pale plants, the
dark plants. We see their children when they grow today, out of the sun's light in the sad
places. After, the heaven made grow another kind of worlds: the high climbers, the brighthaired
forests, cheeks of flowers. First were the darker, then the brighter. First was the worlds'
brood, then the suns' brood."
This was as much of it as he contrived later to remember and could translate. As the song
ended Oyarsa said:
"Let us scatter the movements which were their bodies. So will Maleldil scatter all worlds
when the first and feeble is worn."
He made a sign to one of the pfifltriggi, who instantly arose and approached the corpses.
The hrossa, now singing again but very softly, drew back at least ten paces. The pfifltrigg
touched each of the three dead in turn with some small object that appeared to be made of glass
or crystal - and then jumped away with one of his froglike leaps. Ransom closed his eyes to
protect them from a blinding light and felt something like a very strong wind blowing in his
face, for a fraction of a second. Then all was calm again, and the three biers were empty.
"God! That would be a trick worth knowing on earth," said Devine to Ransom. "Solves the
murderer's problem about the disposal of the body, eh?"
But Ransom, who was thinking of Hyoi, did not answer him; and before he spoke again
everyone's attention was diverted by the return of the unhappy Weston among his guards.
XX
THE hross who headed this procession was a conscientious creature and began at once
explaining itself in a rather troubled voice.
"I hope we have done right, Oyarsa," it said. "But we do not know. We dipped his head in
the cold water seven times, but the seventh time something fell off it. We had thought it was
the top of his head, but now we saw it was a covering made of the skin of some other creature.
Then some said we had done your will with the seven dips, and others said not. In the end we
dipped it seven times more. We hope that was right. The creature talked a lot between the
dips, and most between the second seven, but we could not understand it."
"You have done very well, Hnoo," said Oyarsa. "Stand away that I may see it, for now I will
speak to it."
The guards fell away on each side. Weston's usually pale face, under the bracing influence
of the cold water, had assumed the colour of a ripe tomato, and his hair, which had naturally not
been cut since he reached Malacandra, was plastered in straight, lank masses across his
forehead. A good deal of water was still dripping over his nose and ears. His expression -
unfortunately wasted on an audience ignorant of terrestrial physiognomy - was that of a brave
man suffering in a great cause, and rather eager than reluctant to face the worst or even to
provoke it. In explanation of his conduct it is only fair to remember that he had already that
morning endured all the terrors of an expected martyrdom and all the anticlimax of fourteen
compulsory cold douches. Devine, who knew his man, shouted out to Weston in English.
"Steady, Weston. These devils can split the atom or something pretty like it. Be careful
what you say to them and don't let's have any of your bloody nonsense."
"Huh !" said Weston. "So you've gone native too?"
"Be silent," said the voice of Oyarsa. "You, thick one, have told me nothing of yourself, so I
will tell it to you. In your own world you have attained great wisdom concerning bodies and by
this you have been able to make a ship that can cross the heaven; but in all other things you
have the mind of an animal. When first you came here, I sent for you, meaning you nothing but
honour. The darkness in your mind filled you with fear. Because you thought I meant evil to
you, you went as a beast goes against a beast of some other kind, and snared this Ransom. You
would give him up to the evil you feared. Today, seeing him here, to save your own life, you
would have given him to me a second time, still thinking I meant him hurt. These are your
dealings with your own kind. And what you intend to my people, I know. Already you have
killed some. And you have come here to kill them all. To you it is nothing whether a creature
is hnau or not. At first I thought this was because you cared only whether a creature had a body
like your own; but Ransom has that and you would kill him as lightly as any of my hnau. I did
not know that the Bent One had done so much in your world and still I do not understand it. If
you were mine, I would unbody you even now. Do not think follies; by my hand Maleldil does
greater things than this, and I can unmake you even on the borders of your own world's air. But
I do not yet resolve to do this. It is for you to speak. Let me see if there is anything in your
mind besides fear and death and desire."
Weston turned to Ransom. "I see," he said, "that you have chosen the most momentous
crisis in the history of the human race to betray it." Then he turned in the direction of the voice.
"I know you kill us," he said. "Me not afraid. Others come, make it our world -"
But Devine had jumped to his feet, and interrupted him.
"No, no, Oyarsa," he shouted. "You no listen him. He very foolish man, he have dreams.
We little people, only want pretty sun-bloods. You give us plenty sun-bloods, we go back into
sky, you never see us no more. All done, see ?"
"Silence," said Oyarsa. There was an almost imperceptible change in the light, if it could be
called light, out of which the voice came, and Devine crumpled up and fell back on the ground.
When he resumed his sitting position he was white and panting.
"Speak on," said Oyarsa to Weston.
"Me no ... no ..." began Weston in Malacandrian and then broke off. "I can't say what I want
in their accursed language," he said in English.
"Speak to Ransom and he shall turn it into our speech," said Oyarsa.
Weston accepted the arrangement at once. He believed that the hour of his death was come
and he was determined to utter the thing - almost the only thing outside his own science - which
he had to say. He cleared his throat, almost he struck a gesture, and began:
"To you I may seem a vulgar robber, but I bear on my shoulders the destiny of the human
race. Your tribal life with its stone-age weapons and beehive huts, its primitive coracles and
elementary social structure, has nothing to compare with our civilization - with our science,
medicine and law, our armies, our architecture, our commerce, and our transport system which
is rapidly annihilating space and time. Our right to supersede you is the right of the higher over
the lower. Life -"
"Half a moment," said Ransom in English. "That's about as much as I can manage at one
go." Then, turning to Oyarsa, he began translating as well as he could. The process was
difficult and the result - which he felt to be rather unsatisfactory - was something like this:
"Among us, Oyarsa, there is a kind of hnau who will take other hnaus' food and - and things,
when they are not looking. He says he is not an ordinary one of that kind. He says what he
does now will make very different things happen to those of our people who are not yet born.
He says that, among you, hnau of one kindred all live together and the hrossa have spears like
those we used a very long time ago and your huts are small and round and your boats small and
light and like our old ones, and you have one ruler. He says it is different with us. He says we
know much. There is a thing happens in our world when the body of a living creature feels
pains and becomes weak, and he says we sometimes know how to stop it. He says we have
many bent people and we kill them or shut them in huts and that we have people for settling
quarrels between the bent hnau about their huts and mates and things. He says we have many
ways for the hnau of one land to kill those of another and some are trained to do it. He says we
build very big and strong huts of stones and other things - like the pfifltriggi. And he says we
exchange many things among ourselves and can carry heavy weights very quickly a long way.
Because of all this, he says it would not be the act of a bent hnau if our people killed all your
people."
As soon as Ransom had finished, Weston continued.
"Life is greater than any system of morality; her claims are absolute. It is not by tribal taboos
and copy-book maxims that she has pursued her relentless march from the amoeba to man and
from man to civilization."
"He says," began Ransom, "that living creatures are stronger than the question whether an
act is bent or good - no, that cannot be right - he says it is better to be alive and bent than to be
dead - no - he says, he says - I cannot say what he says, Oyarsa, in your language. But he goes
on to say that the only good thing is that there should be very many creatures alive. He says
there were many other animals before the first men and the later ones were better than the
earlier ones; but he says the animals were not born because of what is said to the young about
bent and good action by their elders. And he says these animals did not feel any pity."
"She -" began Weston.
"I'm sorry," interrupted Ransom, "but i've forgotten who She is."
"Life, of course," snapped Weston. "She has ruthlessly broken down all obstacles and
liquidated all failures and today in her highest form - civilized man - and in me as his
representative, she presses forward to that interplanetary leap which will, perhaps, place her for
ever beyond the reach of death."
"He says," resumed Ransom, "that these animals learned to do many difficult things, except
those who could not; and those ones died and the other animals did not pity them. And he says
the best animal now is the kind of man who makes the big huts and carries the heavy weights
and does all the other things I told you about; and he is one of these and he says that if the
others all knew what he was doing they would be pleased. He says that if he could kill you all
and bring our people to live in Malacandra, then they might be able to go on living here after
something had gone wrong with our world. And then if something went wrong with
Malacandra they might go and kill all the hnau in another world. And then another - and so
they would never die out."
"It is in her right," said Weston, "the right, or, if you will, the might of Life herself, that I am
prepared without flinching to plant the flag of man on the soil of Malacandra: to march on, step
by step, superseding, where necessary, the lower forms of life that we find, claiming planet after
planet, system after system, till our posterity - whatever strange form and yet unguessed
mentality they have assumed - dwell in the universe wherever the universe is habitable."
"He says," translated Ransom, "that because of this it would not be a bent action - or else, he
says, it would be a possible action - for him to kill you all and bring us here. He says he would
feel no pity. He is saying again that perhaps they would be able to keep moving from one world
to another and wherever they came they would kill everyone. I think he is now talking about
worlds that go round other suns. He wants the creatures born from us to be in as many places
as they can. He says he does not know what kind of creatures they will be."
"I may fall," said Weston. "But while I live I will not, with such a key in my hand, consent
to close the gates of the future on my race. What lies in that future, beyond our present ken,
passes imagination to conceive: it is enough for me that there is a Beyond."
"He is saying," Ransom translated, "that he will not stop trying to do all this unless you kill
him. And he says that though he doesn't know what will happen to the creatures sprung from
us, he wants it to happen very much."
Weston, who had now finished his statement, looked round instinctively for a chair to sink
into. On Earth he usually sank into a chair as the applause began. Finding none - he was not
the kind of man to sit on the ground like Devine - he folded his arms and stared with a certain
dignity about him.
"It is well that I have heard you," said Oyarsa. "For though your mind is feebler, your will is
less bent than I thought. It is not for yourself that you would do all this."
"No," said Weston proudly in Malacandrian. "Me die. Man live."
"Yet you know that these creatures would have to be made quite unlike you before they lived
on other worlds."
"Yes, yes. All new. No one know yet. Strange! Big!"
"Then it is not the shape of body that you love?"
"No. Me no care how they shaped."
"One would think, then, that it is for the mind you care. But that cannot be, or you would
love hnau wherever you met it."
"No care for hnau. Care for man."
"But if it is neither man's mind, which is as the mind of all other hnau - is not Maleldil
maker of them all? - nor his body, which will change - if you care for neither of these, what do
you mean by man?"
This had to be translated to Weston. When he understood it, he replied:
"Me care for man - care for our race - what man begets -" He had to ask Ransom the words
for race and beget.
"Strange!" said Oyarsa. "You do not love any one of your race - you would have let me kill
Ransom. You do not love the mind of your race, nor the body. Any kind of creature will please
you if only it is begotten by your kin as they now are. It seems to me, Thick One, that what you
really love is no completed creature but the very seed itself: for that is all that is left."
"Tell him," said Weston when he had been made to understand this, "that I don't pretend to
be a metaphysician. I have not come here to chop logic. If he cannot understand - as apparently
you can't either - anything so fundamental as a man's loyalty to humanity, I can't make him
understand it."
But Ransom was unable to translate this and the voice of Oyarsa continued:
"I see now how the lord of the silent world has bent you. There are laws that all hnau know,
of pity and straight dealing and shame and the like, and one of these is the love of kindred. He
has taught you to break all of them except this one, which is not one of the greatest laws; this
one he has bent till it becomes folly and has set it up, thus bent, to be a little, blind Oyarsa in
your brain. And now you can do nothing but obey it, though if we ask you why it is a law you
can give no other reason for it than for all the other and greater laws which it drives you to
disobey. Do you know why he has done this?"
"Me think no such person - me wise, new man - no believe all that old talk."
"I will tell you. He has left you this one because a bent hnau can do more evil than a broken
one. He has only bent you; but this Thin One who sits on the ground he has broken, for he has
left him nothing but greed. He is now only a talking animal and in my world he could do no
more evil than an animal. If he were mine I would unmake his body, for the hnau in it is
already dead. But if you were mine I would try to cure you. Tell me, Thick One, why did you
come here?"
"Me tell you. Make man live all the time."
"But are your wise men so ignorant as not to know that Malacandra is older than your own
world and nearer its death? Most of it is dead already. My people live only in the handramits;
the heat and the water have been more and will be less. Soon now, very soon, I will end my
world and give back my people to Maleldil."
"Me know all that plenty. This only first try. Soon they go on another world."
"But do you not know that all worlds will die?"
"Men go jump off each before it deads - on and on, see?"
"And when all are dead?"
Weston was silent. After a time Oyarsa spoke again.
"Do you not ask why my people, whose world is old, have not rather come to yours and
taken it long ago."
"Ho! Ho!" said Weston. "You not know how."
"You are wrong," said Oyarsa. "Many thousands of thousand years before this, when
nothing yet lived on your world, the cold death was coming on my harandra. Then I was in
deep trouble, not chiefly for the death of my hnau - Maleldil does not make them long-livers -
but for the things which the lord of your world, who was not yet bound, put into their minds.
He would have made them as your people are now - wise enough to see the death of their kind
approaching but not wise enough to endure it. Bent counsels would soon have risen among
them. They were well able to have made sky-ships. By me Maleldil stopped them. Some I
cured, some I unbodied -"
"And see what come!" interrupted Weston. "You now very few - shut up in handramits -
soon all die."
"Yes," said Oyarsa, "but one thing we left behind us on the harandra: fear. And with fear,
murder and rebellion. The weakest of my people does not fear death. It is the Bent One, the
lord of your world, who wastes your lives and befouls them with flying from what you know
will overtake you in the end. If you were subjects of Maleldil you would have peace."
Weston writhed in the exasperation born of his desire to speak and his ignorance of the
language.
"Trash! Defeatist trash!" he shouted at Oyarsa in English; then, drawing himself up to his
full height, he added in Malacandrian, "You say your Maleldil let all go dead. Other one, Bent
One, he fight, jump, live - not all talkee-talkee. Me no care Maleldil. Like Bent One better: me
on his side."
"But do you not see that he never will nor can," began Oyarsa, and then broke off, as if
recollecting himself. "But I must learn more of your world from Ransom, and for that I need
till night. I will not kill you, not even the thin one, for you are out of my world. Tomorrow you
shall go hence again in your ship."
Devine's face suddenly fell. He began talking rapidly in English.
"For God's sake, Weston, make him understand. We've been here for months - the Earth is
not in opposition now. Tell him it can't be done. He might as well kill us at once."
"How long will your journey be to Thulcandra?" asked Oyarsa.
Weston, using Ransom as his interpreter, explained that the journey, in the present position
of the two planets, was almost impossible. The distance had.increased by millions of miles.
The angle of their course to the solar rays would be totally different from that which he had
counted upon. Even if by a hundredth chance they could hit the Earth, it was almost certain that
their supply of oxygen would be exhausted long before they arrived.
"Tell him to kill us now," he added.
"All this I know," said Oyarsa. "And if you stay in my world I must kill you: no such
creature will I suffer in Malacandra. I know there is small chance of your reaching your world;
but small is not the same as none. Between now and the next noon choose which you will take.
In the meantime, tell me this. If you reach it at all, what is the most time you will need?"
After a prolonged calculation, Weston, in a shaken voice, replied that if they had not made it
in ninety days they would never make it, and they would, moreover, be dead of suffocation.
"Ninety days you shall have," said Oyarsa. "My sorns and pfiflriggi will give you air (we
also have that art) and food for ninety days. But they will do something else to your ship. I am
not minded that it should return into the heaven if once it reaches Thulcandra. You, Thick One,
were not here when I unmade my dead hrossa whom you killed: the Thin One will tell you.
This I can do, as Maleldil has taught me, over a gap of time or a gap of place. Before your skyship
rises, my sorns will have so dealt with it that on the ninetieth day it will unbody, it will
become what you call nothing. If that day finds it in heaven your death will be no bitterer
because of this; but do not tarry in your ship if once you touch Thulcandra. Now lead these two
away, and do you, my children, go where you will. But I must talk with Ransom."
XXI
ALL THAT afternoon Ransom remained alone answering Oyarsa's questions. I am not
allowed to record this conversation, beyond saying that the voice concluded it with the words:
"You have shown me more wonders than are known in the whole of heaven."
After that they discussed Ransom's own future. He was given full liberty to remain in
Malacandra or to attempt the desperate voyage to Earth. The problem was agonizing to him. In
the end he decided to throw in his lot with Weston and Devine.
"Love of our own kind," he said, "is not the greatest of laws, but you, Oyarsa, have said it is
a law. If I cannot live in Thulcandra, it is better for me not to live at all."
"You have chosen rightly," said Oyarsa. "And I will tell you two things. My people will
take all the strange weapons out of the ship, but they will give one to you. And the eldila of
deep heaven will be about your ship till it reaches the air of Thulcandra, and often in it. They
will not let the other two kill you."
It had not occurred to Ransom before that this own murder might be one of the first
expedients for economizing food and oxygen which would occur to Weston and Devine. He
was now astonished at his obtuseness, and thanked Oyarsa for his protective measures. Then
the great eldil dismissed him with these words:
"You are guilty of no evil, Ransom of Thulcandra, except a little fearfulness. For that, the
journey you go on is your pain, and perhaps your cure: for you must be either mad or brave
before it is ended. But I lay also a command on you; you must watch this Weston and this
Devine in Thulcandra if ever you arrive there. They may yet do much evil in, and beyond, your
world. From what you have told me, I begin to see that there are eldila who go down into your
air, into the very stronghold of the Bent One; your world is not so fast shut as was thought in
these parts of heaven. Watch those two bent ones. Be courageous. Fight them. And when you
have need, some of our people will help. Maleldil will show them to you. It may even be that
you and I shall meet again while you are still in the body; for it is not without the wisdom of
Maleldil that we have met now and I have learned so much of your world. It seems to me that
this is the beginning of more comings and goings between the heavens and the worlds and
between one world and another - though not such as the Thick One hoped. I am allowed to tell
you this. The year we are now in - but heavenly years are not as yours - has long been
prophesied as a year of stirrings and high changes and the siege of Thulcandra may be near its
end. Great things are on foot. If Maleldil does not forbid me, I will not hold aloof from them.
And now, farewell."
It was through vast crowds of all the Malacandrian species that the three human beings
embarked next day on their terrible journey. Weston was pale and haggard from a night of
calculations intricate enough to tax any mathematician even if his life did not hang on them.
Devine was noisy, reckless and a little hysterical. His whole view of Malacandra had been
altered overnight by the discovery that the 'natives' had an alcoholic drink, and he had even
been trying to teach them to smoke. Only the pfifltriggi had made much of it. He was now
consoling himself for an acute headache and the prospect of a lingering death by tormenting
Weston. Neither partner was pleased to find that all weapons had been removed from the
space-ship, but in other respects everything was as they wished it. At about an hour after noon
Ransom took a last, long look at the blue waters, purple forest and remote green walls of the
familiar handramit, and followed the other two through the manhole. Before it was closed
Weston warned them that they must economize air by absolute stillness. No unnecessary
movement must be made during their voyage; even talking must be prohibited.
"I shall speak only in an emergency," he said.
"Thank God for that, anyway," was Devine's last shot. Then they screwed themselves in.
Ransom went at once to the lower side of the sphere, into the chamber which was now most
completely upside down, and stretched himself on what would later become its skylight. He
was surprised to find that they were already thousands of feet up. The handramit was only a
straight purple line across the rose-red surface of the harandra. They were above the junction
of two handramits. One of them was doubtless that in which he had lived, the other that which
contained Meldilorn. The gully by which he had cut off the corner between the two, on
Augray's shoulders, was quite invisible.
Each minute more handramits came into view - long straight lines, some parallel, some
intersecting, some building triangles. The landscape became increasingly geometrical. The
waste between the purple lines appeared perfectly flat. The rosy colour of the petrified forests
accounted for its tint immediately below him; but to the north and east the great sand deserts of
which the sorns had told him were now appearing as illimitable stretches of yellow and ochre.
To the west a huge discoloration began to show. It was an irregular patch of greenish blue that
looked as if it were sunk below the level of the surrounding harandra. He concluded it was the
forest lowland of the pfifltriggi - or rather one of their forest lowlands, for now similar patches
were appearing in all directions, some of them mere blobs at the intersection of handramits,
some of vast extent. He became vividly conscious that his knowledge of Malacandra was
minute, local, parochial. It was as if a sorn had journeyed forty million miles to the Earth and
spent his stay there between Worthing and Brighton. He reflected that he would have very little
to show for his amazing voyage if he survived it: a smattering of the language, a few
landscapes, some half-understood physics - but where were the statistics, the history, the broad
survey of extra-terrestrial conditions, which such a traveller ought to bring back? Those
handramits, for example. Seen from the height which the space-ship had now attained, in all
their unmistakable geometry, they put to shame his original impression that they were natural
valleys. There were gigantic feats of engineering, about which he had learned nothing; feats
accomplished, if all were true, before human history began ... before animal history began. Or
was that only mythology? He knew it would seem like mythology when he got back to Earth (if
he ever got back), but the presence of Oyarsa was still too fresh a memory to allow him any real
doubts. It even occurred to him that the distinction between history and mythology might be
itself meaningless outside the Earth.
The thought baffled him, and he turned again to the landscape below - the landscape which
became every moment less of a landscape and more of a diagram. By this time, to the east, a
much larger and darker patch of discoloration than he had yet seen was pushing its way into the
reddish ochre of the Malacandrian world - a curiously shaped patch with long arms or horns
extended on each side and a sort of bay between them, like the concave side of a crescent. It
grew and grew. The wide dark arms seemed to be spread out to engulf the whole planet.
Suddenly he saw a bright point of light in the middle of this dark patch and realized that it was
not a patch on the surface of the planet at all, but the black sky showing behind her. The
smooth curve was the edge of her disk. At this, for the first time since their embarkation, fear
took hold of him. Slowly, yet not too slowly for him to see, the dark arms spread farther and
even farther round the lighted surface till at last they met. The whole disk, framed in blackness,
was before him. The faint percussions of the meteorites had long been audible; the window
through which he was gazing was no longer definitely beneath him. His limbs, though already
very light, were almost too stiff to move, and he was very hungry. He looked at his watch. He
had been at his post, spellbound, for nearly eight hours.
He made his way with difficulty to the sunward side of the ship and reeled back almost
blinded with the glory of the light. Groping, he found his darkened glasses in his old cabin and
got himself food and water: Weston had rationed them strictly in both. He opened the door of
the control room and looked in. Both the partners, their faces drawn with anxiety, were seated
before a kind of metal table; it was covered with delicate, gently vibrating instruments in which
crystal and fine wire were the predominant materials. Both ignored his presence. For the rest
of the silent journey he was free of the whole ship.
When he returned to the dark side, the world they were leaving hung in the star-strewn sky
not much bigger than our earthly moon. Its colours were still visible - a reddish-yellow disk
blotched with greenish blue and capped with white at the poles. He saw the two tiny
Malacandrian moons - their movement quite perceptible - and reflected that they were among
the thousand things he had not noticed during his sojourn there. He slept, and woke, and saw
the disk still hanging in the sky. It was smaller than the Moon now. Its colours were gone
except for a faint, uniform tinge of redness in its light; even the light was not now incomparably
stronger than that of the countless stars which surrounded it. It had ceased to be Malacandra; it
was only Mars.
He soon fell back into the old routine of sleeping and basking, punctuated with the making
of some scribbled notes for his Malacandrian dictionary. He knew that there was very little
chance of his being able to communicate his new knowledge to man, that unrecorded death in
the depth of space would almost certainly be the end of their adventure. But already it had
become impossible to think of it as 'space.' Some moments of cold fear he had; but each time
they were shorter and more quickly swallowed up in a sense of awe which made his personal
fate seem wholly insignificant. He could not feel that they were an island of life journeying
through an abyss of death. He felt almost the opposite - that life was waiting outside the little
iron eggshell in which they rode, ready at any moment to break in, and that, if it killed them, it
would kill them by excess of its vitality. He hoped passionately that if they were to perish they
would perish by the 'unbodying 'of the space-ship and not by suffocation within it. To be let
out, to be set free, to dissolve into the ocean of eternal noon, seemed to him at certain moments
a consummation even more desirable than their return to Earth. And if he had felt some such
lift of the heart when first he passed through heaven on their outward journey, he felt it now
tenfold, for now he was convinced that the abyss was full of life in the most literal sense, full of
living creatures.
His confidence in Oyarsa's words about the eldila increased rather than diminished as they
went on. He saw none of them; the intensity of light in which the ship swam allowed none of
the fugitive variations which would have betrayed their presence. But he heard, or thought he
heard, all kinds of delicate sound, or vibrations akin to sound, mixed with the tinkling rain of
meteorites, and often the sense of unseen presences even within the space-ship became
irresistible. It was this, more than anything else, that made his own chances of life seem so
unimportant. He and all his race showed small and ephemeral against a background of such
immeasurable fullness. His brain reeled at the thought of the true population of the universe,
the three-dimensional infinitude of their territory, and the unchronicled aeons of their past; but
his heart became steadier than it had ever been.
It was well for him that he had reached this frame of mind before the real hardships of their
journey began. Ever since their departure from Malacandra, the thermometer had steadily risen;
now it was higher than it had stood at any time on their outward journey. And still it rose. The
light also increased. Under his glasses he kept his eyes habitually tight shut, opening them only
for the shortest time for necessary movements. He knew that if he reached Earth it would be
with permanently damaged sight. But all this was nothing to the torment of heat. All three of
them were awake for twenty-four hours out of the twenty-four, enduring with dilated eyeballs,
blackened lips and froth-flecked cheeks the agony of thirst. It would be madness to increase
their scanty rations of water: madness even to consume air in discussing the question.
He saw well enough what was happening. In his last bid for life Weston was venturing
inside the Earth's orbit, leading them nearer the Sun than man, perhaps than life, had ever been.
Presumably this was unavoidable; one could not follow a retreating Earth round the rim of its
own wheeling course. They must be trying to meet it - to cut across ... it was madness! But the
question did not much occupy his mind; it was not possible for long to think of anything but
thirst. One thought of water; then one thought of thirst; then one thought of thinking of thirst;
then of water again. And still the thermometer rose. The walls of the ship were too hot to
touch. It was obvious that a crisis was approaching. In the next few hours it must kill them or
get less.
It got less. There came a time when they lay exhausted and shivering in what seemed the
cold, though it was still hotter than any terrestrial climate. Weston had so far succeeded; he had
risked the highest temperature at which human life could theoretically survive, and they had
lived through it. But they were not the same men. Hitherto Weston had slept very little even in
his watches off; always, after an hour or so of uneasy rest, he had returned to his charts and to
his endless, ahnost despairing, calculations. You could see him fighting the despair - pinning
his terrified brain down, and again down, to the figures. Now he never looked at them. He
even seemed careless in the control room. Devine moved and looked like a somnambulist.
Ransom lived increasingly on the dark side and for long hours he thought of nothing. Although
the first great danger was past, none of them, at this time, had any serious hope of a successful
issue to their journey. They had now been fifty days, without speech, in their steel shell, and
the air was already very bad.
Weston was so unlike his old self that he even allowed Ransom to take his share in the
navigation. Mainly by signs, but with the help of a few whispered words, he taught him all that
was necessary at this stage of the journey. Apparently they were racing home - but with little
chance of reaching it in time - before some sort of cosmic 'trade-wind.' A few rules of thumb
enabled Ransom to keep the star which Weston pointed out to him in its position at the centre
of the skylight, but always with his left hand on the bell to Weston's cabin.
This star was not the Earth. The days - the purely theoretical 'days' which bore such a
desperately practical meaning for the travellers - mounted to fifty-eight before Weston changed
course, and a different luminary was in the centre. Sixty days, and it was visibly a planet.
Sixty-six, and it was like a planet seen through field-glasses. Seventy, and it was like nothing
that Ransom had ever seen - a little dazzling disk too large for a planet and far too small for the
Moon. Now that he was navigating, his celestial mood was shattered. Wild, animal thirst for
life, mixed with homesick longing for the free airs and the sights and smells of earth - for grass
and meat and beer and tea and the human voice - awoke in him. At first his chief difficulty on
watch had been to resist drowsiness; now, though the air was worse, feverish excitement kept
him vigilant. Often when he came off duty he found his right arm stiff and sore; for hours he
had been pressing it unconsciously against the control board as if his puny thrust could spur the
space-ship to yet greater speed.
Now they had twenty days to go. Nineteen - eighteen - and on the white terrestrial disk, now
a little larger than a sixpence, he thought he could make out Australia and the south-east corner
of Asia. Hour after hour, though the markings moved slowly across the disk with the Earth's
diurnal revolution, the disk itself refused to grow larger. "Get on! Get on!" Ransom muttered
to the ship. Now ten days were left and it was like the Moon and so bright that they could not
look steadily at it. The air in their little sphere was ominously bad, but Ransom and Devine
risked a whisper as they changed watches.
"We'll do, it," they said. "We'll do it yet."
On the eighty-seventh day, when Ransom relieved Devine, he thought there was something
wrong with the Earth. Before his watch was done, he was sure. It was no longer a true circle,
but bulging a little on one side; it was almost pear-shaped. When Weston came on duty he gave
one glance at the skylight, rang furiously on the bell for Devine, thrust Ransom aside, and took
the navigating seat. His face was the colour of putty. He seemed to be about to do something
to the controls, but as Devine entered the room he looked up and shrugged his shoulders with a
gesture of despair. Then he buried his face in his hands and laid his head down on the controlboard.
Ransom and Devine exchanged glances. They bundled Weston out of the seat - he was
crying like a child - and Devine took his place. And now at last Ransom understood the
mystery of the bulging Earth. What had appeared as a bulge on one side of her disk was
becoming increasingly distinct as a second disk, a disk almost as large in appearance as her
own. It was covering more than half of the Earth. It was the Moon - between them and the
Earth, and two hundred and forty thousand miles nearer. Ransom did not know what fate this
might mean for the space-ship. Devine obviously did, and never had he appeared so admirable.
His face was as pale as Weston's, but his eyes were clear and preternaturally bright; he sat
crouched over the controls like an animal about to spring and he was whistling very softly
between his teeth.
Hours later Ransom understood what was happening. The Moon's disk was now larger than
the Earth's, and very gradually it became apparent to him that both disks were diminishing in
size. The space-ship was no longer approaching either the Earth or the Moon; it was farther
away from them than it had been half an hour ago, and that was the meaning of Devine's
feverish activity with the controls. It was not merely that the Moon was crossing their path and
cutting them off from the Earth; apparently for some reason - probably gravitational - it was
dangerous to get too close to the Moon, and Devine was standing off into space. In sight of
harbour they were being forced to turn back to the open sea. He glanced up at the chronometer.
It was the morning of the eighty-eighth day. Two days to make the Earth, and they were
moving away from her.
"I suppose this finishes us?" he whispered.
"Expect so," whispered Devine, without looking round.
Weston presently recovered sufficiently to come back and stand beside Devine. There was
nothing for Ransom to do. He was sure, now, that they were soon to die. With this realization,
the agony of his suspense suddenly disappeared. Death, whether it came now or some thirty
years later on earth, rose up and claimed his attention. There are preparations a man likes to
make. He left the control room and returned into one of the sunward chambers, into the
indifference of the moveless light, the warmth, the silence and the sharp-cut shadows. Nothing
was farther from his mind than sleep. It must have been the exhausted atmosphere which made
him drowsy. He slept.
He awoke in almost complete darkness in the midst of a loud continuous noise, which he
could not at first identify. It reminded him of something - something he seemed to have heard
in a previous existence. It was a prolonged drumming noise close above his head. Suddenly
his heart gave a great leap.
"Oh God," he sobbed. "Oh God! It's rain."
He was on Earth. The air was heavy and stale about him, but the choking sensations he had
been suffering were gone. He realized that he was still in the space-ship. The others, in fear of
its threatened 'unbodying,' had characteristically abandoned it the moment it touched Earth and
left him to his fate. It was difficult in the dark, and under the crushing weight of terrestrial
gravity, to find his way out. But he managed it. He found the manhole and slithered, drinking
great draughts of air, down the outside of the sphere; slipped in mud, blessed the smell of it,
and at last raised the unaccustomed weight of his body to its feet. He stood in pitch-black night
under torrential rain. With every pore of his body he drank it in; with every desire of his heart
he embraced the smell of the field about him - a patch of his native planet where grass grew,
where cows moved, where presently he would come to hedges and a gate.
He had walked about half an hour when a vivid light behind him and a strong, momentary
wind informed him that the space-ship was no more. He felt very little interest. He had seen
dim lights, the lights of men, ahead. He contrived to get into a lane, then into a road, then into a
village street. A lighted door was open. There were voices from within and they were speaking
English. There was a familiar smell. He pushed his way in, regardless of the surprise he was
creating, and walked to the bar.
"A pint of bitter, please," said Ransom.
XXII
AT THIS point, if I were guided by purely literary considerations, my story would end, but it
is time to remove the mask and to acquaint the reader with the real and practical purpose for
which this book has been written. At the same time he will learn how the writing of it became
possible at all.
Dr Ransom - and at this stage it will become obvious that this is not his real name - soon
abandoned the idea of his Malacandrian dictionary and indeed all idea of communicating his
story to the world. He was ill for several months, and when he recovered he found himself in
considerable doubt as to whether what he remembered had really occurred. It looked very like a
delusion produced by his illness, and most of his apparent adventures could, he saw, be
explained psychoanalytically. He did not lean very heavily on this fact himself, for he had long
since observed that a good many 'real' things in the fauna and flora of our own world could be
accounted for in the same way if you started with the assumption that they were illusions. But
he felt that if he himself half doubted his own story, the rest of the world would disbelieve it
completely. He decided to hold his tongue, and there the matter would have rested but for a
very curious coincidence.
This is where I come into the story. I had known Dr Ransom slightly for several years and
corresponded with him on literary and philological subjects, though we very seldom met. It
was, therefore, quite in the usual order of things that I should write him a letter some months
ago, of which I will quote the relevant paragraph. It ran like this:
'I am now working at the Platonists of the twelfth century and incidentally discovering that
they wrote damnably difficult Latin. In one of them, Bernardus Silvestris, there is a word I
should particularly like your views on - the word Oyarses. It occurs in the description of a
voyage through the heavens, and an Oyarses seems to be the "intelligence" or tutelary spirit of a
heavenly sphere, i.e. in our language, of a planet. I asked C. J. about it and he says it ought to
be Ousiarches. That, of course, would make sense, but I do not feel quite satisfied. Have you
by any chance ever come across a word like Oyarses, or can you hazard any guess as to what
language it may be?'
The immediate result of this letter was an invitation to spend a weekend with Dr Ransom.
He told me his whole story, and since then he and I have been almost continuously at work on
the mystery. A good many facts, which I have no intention of publishing at present, have fallen
into our hands; facts about planets in general and about Mars in particular, facts about medieval
Platonists, and (not least in importance) facts about the Professor to whom I am giving the
fictitious name of Weston. A systematic report of these facts might, of course, be given to the
civilized world: but that would almost certainly result in universal incredulity and in a libel
action from 'Weston.' At the same time, we both feel that we cannot be silent. We are being
daily confirmed in our belief that the oyarses of Mars was right when it said that the present
'celestial year' was to be a revolutionary one, that the long isolation of our own planet is nearing
its end, and that great doings are on foot. We have found reason to believe that the medieval
Platonists were living in the same celestial year as ourselves - in fact, that it began in the twelfth
century of our era - and that the occurrence of the name Oyarsa (Latinized as oyarses) in
Bernardus Silvestris is not an accident. And we have also evidence - increasing almost daily -
that 'Weston,' or the force or forces behind 'Weston,' will play a very important part in the
events of the next few centuries, and, unless we prevent them, a very disastrous one. We do not
mean that they are likely to invade Mars - our cry is not merely 'Hands off Malacandra.' The
dangers to be feared are not Planetary but cosmic, or at least solar, and they are not temporal but
eternal. More than this it would be unwise to say.
It was Dr Ransom who first saw that our only chance was to publish in the form of fiction
what would certainly not be listened to as fact. He even thought - greatly overrating my literary
powers - that this might have the incidental advantage of reaching a wider public, and that,
certainly, it would reach a great many people sooner than 'Weston.' To my objection that if
accepted as fiction, it would for that very reason be regarded as false, he replied that there
would be indications enough in the narrative for the few readers - the very few - who at present
were prepared to go further into the matter.
"And they," he said, "will easily find out you, or me, and will easily identify Weston.
Anyway," he continued, "what we need for the moment is not so much a body of belief as a
body of people familiarized with certain ideas. If we could even effect in one per cent of our
readers a change-over from the conception of Space to the conception of Heaven, we should
have made a beginning."
What neither of us foresaw was the rapid march of events which was to render the book out
of date before it was published. These events have already made it rather a prologue to our
story than the story itself. But we must let it go as it stands. For the later stages of the
adventure - well, it was Aristotle, long before Kipling, who taught us the formula, "That is
another story."
(Being extracts from a letter written by the original of 'Dr. Ransom' to the author)
… I think you are right, and after the two or three corrections (marked in red) the MS. will
have to stand. I won't deny that I am disappointed, but then any attempt to tell such a story is
bound to disappoint the man who has really been there. I am not now referring to the ruthless
way in which you have cut down all the philological part, though, as it now stands, we are
giving our readers a mere caricature of the Malacandrian language. I mean something more
difficult - something which I couldn't possibly express. How can one 'get across' the
Malacandrian smells? Nothing comes back to me more vividly in my dreams ... especially the
early morning smell in those purple woods, where the very mention of 'early morning' and
'woods' is misleading because it must set you thinking of earth and moss and cobwebs and the
smell of our own planet, but I'm thinking of something totally different. More 'aromatic' ... yes,
but then it is not hot or luxurious or exotic as that word suggests. Something aromatic, spicy,
yet very cold, very thin, tingling at the back of the nose - something that did to the sense of
smell what high, sharp violin notes do to the ear. And mixed with that I always hear the sound
of the singing - great hollow hound-like music from enormous throats, deeper than Chaliapin, a
'warm, dark noise.' I am homesick for my old Malacandrian valley when I think of it; yet God
knows when I heard it there I was homesick enough for the Earth.
Of course you are right; if we are to treat it as a story you must telescope the time I spent in
the village during which 'nothing happened.' But I grudge it. Those quiet weeks, the mere
living among the hrossa, are to me the main thing that happened. I know them, Lewis; that's
what you can't get into a mere story. For instance, because I always take a thermometer with
me on a holiday (it has saved many a one from being spoiled) I know that the normal
temperature of a hross is 103°. I know - though I can't remember learning it - that they live
about 80 Martian years, or 160 earth years; that they marry at about 20 (= 40); that their
droppings, like those of the horse, are not offensive to themselves, or to me, and are used for
agriculture; that they don't shed tears, or blink; that they do get (as you would say) 'elevated' but
not drunk on a gaudy night - of which they have many. But what can one do with these scraps
of information? I merely analyse them out of a whole living memory that can never be put into
words, and no one in this world will be able to build up from such scraps quite the right picture.
For example, can I make even you understand how I know, beyond all question, why it is that
the Malacandrians don't keep pets and, in general, don't feel about their 'lower animals' as we do
about ours? Naturally it is the sort of thing they themselves could never have told me. One just
sees why when one sees the three species together. Each of them is to the others both what a
man is to us and what an animal is to us. They can talk to each other, they can co-operate, they
have the same ethics; to that extent a sorn and a hross meet like two men. But then each finds
the other different, funny, attractive as an animal is attractive. Some instinct starved in us,
which we try to soothe by treating irrational creatures almost as if they were rational, is really
satisfied in Malacandra. They don't need pets.
By the way, while we are on the subject of species, I am rather sorry that the exigencies of
the story have been allowed to simplify the biology so much. Did I give you the impression that
each of the three species was perfectly homogeneous? If so, I misled you. Take the hrossa; my
friends were black hrossa, but there are also silver hrossa, and in some of the western
handramits one finds the great crested hross - ten feet high, a dancer rather than a singer, and
the noblest animal, after man, that I have ever seen. Only the males have the crest. I also saw a
pure white hross at Meldilorn, but like a fool I never found out whether he represented a subspecies
or was a mere freak like our terrestrial albino. There is also at least one other kind of
sorn besides the kind I saw - the soroborn or red sorn of the desert, who lives in the sandy
north. He's a corker by all accounts.
I agree, it is a pity I never saw the pfifltriggi at home. I know nearly enough about them to
'fake' a visit to them as an episode in the story, but I don't think we ought to introduce any mere
fiction. 'True in substance' sounds all very well on earth, but I can't imagine myself explaining
it to Oyarsa, and I have a shrewd suspicion (see my last letter) that I have not heard the end of
him. Anyway, why should our 'readers' (you seem to know the devil of a lot about them!), who
are so determined to hear nothing about the language, be so anxious to know more of the
pfifltriggi? But if you can work it in, there is, of course, no harm in explaining that they are
oviparous and matriarchal, and short-lived compared with the other species. It is pretty plain
that the great depressions which they inhabit are the old ocean-beds of Malacandra. Hrossa,
who had visited them, described themselves as going down into deep forests over sand, 'the
bone-stones (fossils) of ancient wave-borers about them.' No doubt these are the dark patches
seen on the Martian disk from Earth. And that reminds me - the 'maps' of Mars which I have
consulted since I got back are so inconsistent with one another that I have given up the attempt
to identify my own handramit. If you want to try your hand, the desideratum is 'a roughly
north-east and south-west "canal" cutting a north and south "canal" not more than twenty miles
from the equator.' But astronomers differ very much as to what they can see.
Now as to your most annoying question: 'Did Augray, in describing the eldila, confuse the
ideas of a subtler body and a superior being?' No. The confusion is entirely your own. He said
two things: that the eldila had bodies different from those of planetary animals, and that they
were superior in intelligence. Neither he nor anyone else in Malacandra ever confused the one
statement with the other or deduced the one from the other. In fact, I have reasons for thinking
that there are also irrational animals with the eldil type of body (you remember Chaucer's 'airish
beasts' ?)
I wonder are you wise to say nothing about the problem of eldil speech? I agree that it
would spoil the narrative to raise the question during the trial scene at Meldilorn, but surely
many readers will have enough sense to ask how the eldila, who obviously don't breathe, can
talk. It is true that we should have to admit we don't know, but oughtn't the readers to be told
that? I suggested to J. - the only scientist here who is in my confidence - your theory that they
might have instruments, or even organs, for manipulating the air around them and thus
producing sounds indirectly, but he didn't seem to think much of it. He thought it probable that
they directly manipulated the ears of those they were 'speaking' to. That sounds pretty difficult
... of course one must remember that we have really no knowledge of the shape or size of an
eldil, or even of its relations to space (our space) in general. In fact, one wants to keep on
insisting that we really know next to nothing about them. Like you, I can't help trying to fix
their relation to the things that appear in terrestrial tradition - gods, angels, fairies. But we
haven't the data. When I attempted to give Oyarsa some idea of our own Christian angelology,
he certainly seemed to regard our 'angels' as different in some way from himself. But whether
he meant that they were a different species, or only that they were some special military caste
(since our poor old earth turns out to be a kind of Ypres Salient in the universe), I don't know.
Why must you leave out my account of how the shutter jammed just before our landing on
Malacandra? Without this, your description of our sufferings from excessive light on the return
journey raises the very obvious question, 'Why didn't they close their shutters?' I don't believe
your theory that 'readers never notice that sort of thing.' I'm sure I should.
There are two scenes that I wish you could have worked into the book; no matter - they are
worked into me. One or other of them is always before me when I close my eyes.
In one of them I see the Malacandrian sky at morning; pale blue, so pale that now, when I
have grown once more accustomed to terrestrial skies, I think of it as almost white. Against it
the nearer tops of the giant weeds - the 'trees' as you call them - show black, but far away,
across miles of that blinding blue water, the remoter woods are water-colour purple. The
shadows all around me on the pale forest floor are like shadows in snow. There are figures
walking before me; slender yet gigantic form, black and sleek as animated tall hats; their huge
round heads, poised on their sinuous stalk-like bodies, give them the appearance of black tulips.
They go down, singing, to the edge of the lake. The music fills the wood with its vibration,
though it is so soft that I can hardly hear it: it is like dim organ music. Some of them embark,
but most remain. It is done slowly; this is no ordinary embarkation, but some ceremony. It is,
in fact, a hross funeral. Those three with the grey muzzles whom they have helped into the boat
are going to Meldilorn to die. For in that world, except for some few whom the hnakra gets, no
one dies before his time. All live out the full span allotted to their kind, and a death with them
is as predictable as a birth with us. The whole village has known that those three will die this
year, this month; it was an easy guess that they would die even this week. And now they are
off, to receive the last counsel of Oyarsa, to die, and to be by him 'unbodied.' The corpses, as
corpses, will exist only for a few minutes: there are no coffins in Malacandra, no sextons,
churchyards, or undertakers. The valley is solemn at their departure, but I see no signs of
passionate grief. They do not doubt their immortality, and friends of the same generation are
not torn apart. You leave the world, as you entered it with the 'men of your own year.' Death is
not preceded by dread nor followed by corruption.
The other scene is a nocturne. I see myself bathing with Hyoi in the warm lake. He laughs
at my clumsy swimming; accustomed to a heavier world, I can hardly get enough of me under
water to make any headway. And then I see the night sky. The greater part of it is very like
ours, though the depths are blacker and the stars brighter; but something that no terrestrial
analogy will enable you fully to picture is happening in the west. Imagine the Milky Way
magnified - the Milky Way seen through our largest telescope on the clearest night. And then
imagine this, not painted across the zenith, but rising like a constellation behind the mountain
tops - a dazzling necklace of lights brilliant as planets, slowly heaving itself up till it fills a fifth
of the sky and now leaves a belt of blackness between itself and the horizon. It is too bright to
look at for long, but it is only a preparation. Something else is coming. There is a glow like
moonrise on the harandra. Ahihra! cries Hyoi, and other baying voices answer him from the
darkness all about us. And now the true king of night is up, and now he is threading his way
through that strange western galaxy and making its lights dim by comparison with his own. I
turn my eyes away, for the little disk is far brighter than the Moon in her greatest splendour.
The whole handramit is bathed in colourless light; I could count the stems of the forest on the
far side of the lake; I see that my fingernails are broken and dirty. And now I guess what it is
that I have seen - Jupiter rising beyond the Asteroids and forty million miles nearer than he has
ever been to earthly eyes. But the Malacandrians would say 'within the Asteroids,' for they have
an odd habit, sometimes, of turning the solar system inside out. They call the Asteroids the
'dancers before the threshold of the Great Worlds.' The Great Worlds are the planets, as we
should say, 'beyond' or 'outside' the Asteroids. Glundandra (Jupiter) is the greatest of these and
has some importance in Malacandrian thought which I cannot fathom. He is 'the centre,' 'great
Meldilorn,' 'throne' and 'feast.' They are, of course, well aware that he is uninhabitable, at least
by animals of the planetary type; and they certainly have no pagan idea of giving a local
habitation to Maleldil. But somebody or something of great importance is connected with
Jupiter; as usual "The séroni would know." But they never told me. Perhaps the best comment
is in the author whom I mentioned to you: 'For as it was well said of the great Africanus that he
was never less alone than when alone, so, in our philosophy, no parts of this universal frame are
less to be called solitaire than those which the vulgar esteem most solitaire, since the
withdrawing of men and beasts signifieth but the greater frequency of more excellent creatures.'
More of this when you come. I am trying to read every old book on the subject that I can
hear of. Now that 'Weston' has shut the door, the way to the planets lies through the past; if
there is to be any more space-travelling, it will have to be time-travelling as well ...!
This is a story about something that happened long ago when your grandfather was a child. It is a 
very important story because it shows how all the comings and goings between our own world and the 
land of Narnia first began. 
In those days Mr Sherlock Holmes was still living in Baker Street and the Bastables were looking 
for treasure in the Lewisham Road. In those days, if you were a boy you had to wear a stiff Eton collar 
every day, and schools were usually nastier than now. But meals were nicer; and as for sweets, I won't tell 
you how cheap and good they were, because it would only make your mouth water in vain. And in those 
days there lived in London a girl called Polly Plummer. 
She lived in one of a long row of houses which were all joined together. One morning she was out 
in the back garden when a boy scrambled up from the garden next door and put his face over the wall. 
Polly was very surprised because up till now there had never been any children in that house, but only Mr 
Ketterley and Miss Ketterley, a brother and sister, old bachelor and old maid, living together. So she 
looked up, full of curiosity. The face of the strange boy was very grubby. It could hardly have been 
grubbier if he had first rubbed his hands in the earth, and then had a good cry, and then dried his face with 
his hands. As a matter of fact, this was very nearly what he had been doing. 
"Hullo," said Polly. 
"Hullo," said the boy. "What's your name?" 
"Polly," said Polly. "What's yours?" 
"Digory," said the boy. 
"I say, what a funny name!" said Polly. 
"It isn't half so funny as Polly," said Digory. 
"Yes it is," said Polly. 
"No, it isn't," said Digory. 
"At any rate I do wash my face," said Polly, "Which is what you need to do; especially after -" and 
then she stopped. She had been going to say "After you've been blubbing," but she thought that wouldn't 
be polite. 
"Alright, I have then," said Digory in a much louder voice, like a boy who was so miserable that 
he didn't care who knew he had been crying. "And so would you," he went on, "if you'd lived all your life 
in the country and had a pony, and a river at the bottom of the garden, and then been brought to live in a 
beastly Hole like this." 
"London isn't a Hole," said Polly indignantly. But the boy was too wound up to take any notice of 
her, and he went on "And if your father was away in India - and you had to come and live with an Aunt 
and an Uncle who's mad (who would like that?) - and if the reason was that they were looking after your 
Mother - and if your Mother was ill and was going to - going to - die." Then his face went the wrong sort 
of shape as it does if you're trying to keep back your tears. 
"I didn't know. I'm sorry," said Polly humbly. And then, because she hardly knew what to say, and 
also to turn Digory's mind to cheerful subjects, she asked: 
"Is Mr Ketterley really mad?" 
"Well either he's mad," said Digory, "or there's some other mystery. He has a study on the top 
floor and Aunt Letty says I must never go up there. Well, that looks fishy to begin with. And then there's 
another thing. Whenever he tries to say anything to me at meal times - he never even tries to talk to her - 
she always shuts him up. She says, "Don't worry the boy, Andrew" or "I'm sure Digory doesn't want to 
hear about that" or else "Now, Digory, wouldn't you like to go out and play in the garden?" 
"What sort of things does he try to say?" 
"I don't know. He never gets far enough. But there's more than that. One night - it was last night in 
fact - as I was going past the foot of the attic-stairs on my way to bed (and I don't much care for going 
past them either) I'm sure I heard a yell." 
"Perhaps he keeps a mad wife shut up there." 

"Yes, I've thought of that." 
"Or perhaps he's a coiner." 
"Or he might have been a pirate, like the man at the beginning of Treasure Island, and be always 
hiding from his old shipmates." 
"How exciting!" said Polly, "I never knew your house was so interesting." . 
"You may think it interesting," said Digory. "But you wouldn't like it if you had to sleep there. 
How would you like to lie awake listening for Uncle Andrew's step to come creeping along the passage to 
your room? And he has such awful eyes." 
That was how Polly and Digory got to know one another: and as it was just the beginning of the 
summer holidays and neither of them was going to the sea that year, they met nearly every day. 
Their adventures began chiefly because it was one of the wettest and coldest summers there had 
been for years. That drove them to do indoor things: you might say, indoor exploration. It is wonderful 
how much exploring you can do with a stump of candle in a big house, or in a row of houses. Polly had 
discovered long ago that if you opened a certain little door in the box-room attic of her house you would 
find the cistern and a dark place behind it which you could get into by a little careful climbing. The dark 
place was like a long tunnel with brick wall on one side and sloping roof on the other. In the roof there 
were little chunks of light between the slates. There was no floor in this tunnel: you had to step from rafter 
to rafter, and between them there was only plaster. If you stepped on this you would find yourself falling 
through the ceiling of the room below. Polly had used the bit of the tunnel just beside the cistern as a 
smugglers' cave. She had brought up bits of old packing cases and the seats of broken kitchen chairs, and 
things of that sort, and spread them across from rafter to rafter so as to make a bit of floor. Here she kept a 
cash-box containing various treasures, and a story she was writing and usually a few apples. She had often 
drunk a quiet bottle of ginger-beer in there: the old bottles made it look more like a smugglers' cave. 
Digory quite liked the cave (she wouldn't let him see the story) but he was more interested in 
exploring. 
"Look here," he said. "How long does this tunnel go on for? I mean, does it stop where your house 
ends?" 
"No," said Polly. "The walls don't go out to the roof. It goes on. I don't know how far." 
"Then we could get the length of the whole row of houses." 
"So we could," said Polly, "And oh, I say!" 
"What?" 
"We could get into the other houses." 
"Yes, and get taken up for burglars! No thanks." 
"Don't be so jolly clever. I was thinking of the house beyond yours." , 
"What about it?" 
"Why, it's the empty one. Daddy says it's always been empty since we came here." 
"I suppose we ought to have a look at it then," said Digory. He was a good deal more excited than 
you'd have thought from the way he spoke. For of course he was thinking, just as you would have been, of 
all the reasons why the house might have been empty so long. So was Polly. Neither of them said the 
word "haunted". And both felt that once the thing had been suggested, it would be feeble not to do it. 
"Shall we go and try it now?" said Digory. 
"Alright," said Polly. 
"Don't if you'd rather not," said Digory. 
"I'm game if you are," said she. 
"How are we to know we're in the next house but one?" They decided they would have to go out 
into the boxroom and walk across it taking steps as long as the steps from one rafter to the next. That 
would give them an idea of how many rafters went to a room. Then they would allow about four more for 
the passage between the two attics in Polly's house, and then the same number for the maid's bedroom as 
for the box-room. That would give them the length of the house. When they had done that distance twice 
they would be at the end of Digory's house; any door they came to after that would let them into an attic 

of the empty house. 
"But I don't expect it's really empty at all," said Digory. 
"What do you expect?" 
"I expect someone lives there in secret, only coming in and out at night, with a dark lantern. We 
shall probably discover a gang of desperate criminals and get a reward. It's all rot to say a house would be 
empty all those years unless there was some mystery." 
"Daddy thought it must be the drains," said Polly. 
"Pooh! Grown-ups are always thinking of uninteresting explanations," said Digory. Now that they 
were talking by daylight in the attic instead of by candlelight in the Smugglers' Cave it seemed much less 
likely that the empty house would be haunted. 
When they had measured the attic they had to get a pencil and do a sum. They both got different 
answers to it at first, and even when they agreed I am not sure they got it right. They were in a hurry to 
start on the exploration. 
"We mustn't make a sound," said Polly as they climbed in again behind the cistern. Because it was 
such an important occasion they took a candle each (Polly had a good store of them in her cave). 
It was very dark and dusty and draughty and they stepped from rafter to rafter without a word 
except when they whispered to one another, "We're opposite your attic now" or "this must be halfway 
through our house". And neither of them stumbled and the candles didn't go out, and at last they came 
where they could see a little door in the brick wall on their right. There was no bolt or handle on this side 
of it, of course, for the door had been made for getting in, not for getting out; but there was a catch (as 
there often is on the inside of a cupboard door) which they felt sure they would be able to turn. 
"Shall I?" said Digory. 
"I'm game if you are," said Polly, just as she had said before. Both felt that it was becoming very 
serious, but neither would draw back. Digory pushed round the catch with some difficultly. The door 
swung open and the sudden daylight made them blink. Then, with a great shock, they saw that they were 
looking, not into a deserted attic, but into a furnished room. But it seemed empty enough. It was dead 
silent. Polly's curiosity got the better of her. She blew out her candle and stepped out into the strange 
room, making no more noise than a mouse. 
It was shaped, of course, like an attic, but furnished as a sitting-room. Every bit of the walls was 

lined with shelves and every bit of the shelves was full of books. A fire was burning in the grate (you 
remember that it was a very cold wet summer that year) and in front of the fire-place with its back 
towards them was a high-backed armchair. Between the chair and Polly, and filling most of the middle of 
the room, was a big table piled with all sorts of things printed books, and books of the sort you write in, 
and ink bottles and pens and sealing-wax and a microscope. But what she noticed first was a bright red 
wooden tray with a number of rings on it. They were in pairs - a yellow one and a green one together, then 
a little space, and then another yellow one and another green one. They were no bigger than ordinary 
rings, and no one could help noticing them because they were so bright. They were the most beautiful 
shiny little things you can imagine. If Polly had been a very little younger she would have wanted to put 
one in her mouth. 
The room was so quiet that you noticed the ticking of the clock at once. And yet, as she now 
found, it was not absolutely quiet either. There was a faint - a very, very faint - humming sound. If 
Hoovers had been invented in those days Polly would have thought it was the sound of a Hoover being 
worked a long way off - several rooms away and several floors below. But it was a nicer sound than that, 
a more musical tone: only so faint that you could hardly hear it. 
"It's alright; there's no one here," said Polly over her shoulder to Digory. She was speaking above 
a whisper now. And Digory came out, blinking and looking extremely dirty - as indeed Polly was too. 
"This is no good," he said. "It's not an empty house at all. We'd better bunk before anyone 
comes." 
"What do you think those are?" said Polly, pointing at the coloured rings.' 
"Oh come on," said Digory. "The sooner-" 
He never finished what he was going to say for at that moment something happened. The highbacked 
chair in front of the fire moved suddenly and there rose up out of it - like a pantomime demon 
coming up out of a trapdoor the alarming form of Uncle Andrew. They were not in the empty house at all; 
they were in Digory's house and in the forbidden study! Both children said "O-o-oh" and realised their 
terrible mistake. They felt they ought to have known all along that they hadn't gone nearly far enough. 
Uncle Andrew was tall and very thin. He had a long clean-shaven face with a sharply-pointed 
nose and extremely bright eyes and a great tousled mop of grey hair. 

Digory was quite speechless, for Uncle Andrew looked a thousand times more alarming than he 
had ever looked before. Polly was not so frightened yet; but she soon was. For the very first thing Uncle 
Andrew did was to walk across to the door of the room, shut it, and turn the key in the lock. Then he 
turned round, fixed the children with his bright eyes, and smiled, showing all his teeth. 
"There!" he said. "Now my fool of a sister can't get at you!" 
It was dreadfully unlike anything a grown-up would be expected to do. Polly's heart came into her 
mouth, and she and Digory started backing towards the little door they had come in by. Uncle Andrew 
was too quick for them. He got behind them and shut that door too and stood in front of it. Then he 
rubbed his hands and made his knuckles crack. He had very long, beautifully white, fingers. 
"I am delighted to see you," he said. "Two children are just what I wanted." 
"Please, Mr Ketterley," said Polly. "It's nearly my dinner time and I've got to go home. Will you 
let us out, please?" 
"Not just yet," said Uncle Andrew. "This is too good an opportunity to miss. I wanted two 
children. You see, I'm in the middle of a great experiment. I've tried it on a guinea-pig and it seemed to 
work. But then a guinea-pig can't tell you anything. And you can't explain to it how to come back." 
"Look here, Uncle Andrew," said Digory, "it really is dinner time and they'll be looking for us in 
a moment. You must let us out." 
"Must?" said Uncle Andrew. 
Digory and Polly glanced at one another. They dared not say anything, but the glances meant 
"Isn't this dreadful?" and "We must humour him." 
"If you let us go for our dinner now," said Polly, "we could come back after dinner." 

"Ah, but how do I know that you would?" said Uncle Andrew with a cunning smile. Then he 
seemed to change his mind. 
"Well, well," he said, "if you really must go, I suppose you must. I can't expect two youngsters 
like you to find it much fun talking to an old buffer like me." He sighed and went on. "You've no idea 
how lonely I sometimes am. But no matter. Go to your dinner. But I must give you a present before you 
go. It's not every day that I see a little girl in my dingy old study; especially, if I may say so, such a very 
attractive young lady as yourself." 
Polly began to think he might not really be mad after all. 
"Wouldn't you like a ring, my dear?" said Uncle Andrew to Polly. 
"Do you mean one of those yellow or green ones?" said Polly. "How lovely!" 
"Not a green one," said Uncle Andrew. "I'm afraid I can't give the green ones away. But I'd be 
delighted to give you any of the yellow ones: with my love. Come and try one on." 
Polly had now quite got over her fright and felt sure that the old gentleman was not mad; and 
there was certainly something strangely attractive about those bright rings. She moved over to the tray. 
"Why! I declare," she said. "That humming noise gets louder here. It's almost as if the rings were 
making it." 
"What a funny fancy, my dear," said Uncle Andrew with a laugh. It sounded a very natural laugh, 
but Digory had seen an eager, almost a greedy, look on his face. 
"Polly! Don't be a fool!" he shouted. "Don't touch them." 

It was too late. Exactly as he spoke, Polly's hand went out to touch one of the rings. And 
immediately, without a flash or a noise or a warning of any sort, there was no Polly. Digory and his Uncle 
were alone in the room. 
IT was so sudden, and so horribly unlike anything that had ever happened to Digory even in a 
nightmare, that he let out a scream. Instantly Uncle Andrew's hand was over his mouth. "None of that!" he 
hissed in Digory's ear. "If you start making a noise your Mother'll hear it. And you know what a fright 
might do to her." 
As Digory said afterwards, the horrible meanness of getting at a chap in that way, almost made 
him sick. But of course he didn't scream again. 
"That's better," said Uncle Andrew. "Perhaps you couldn't help it. It is a shock when you first see 
someone vanish. Why, it gave even me a turn when the guinea-pig did it the other night." 
"Was that when you yelled?" asked Digory. 
"Oh, you heard that, did you? I hope you haven't been spying on me?" 
"No, I haven't," said Digory indignantly. "But what's happened to Polly?" 
"Congratulate me, my dear boy," said Uncle Andrew, rubbing his hands. "My experiment has 
succeeded. The little girl's gone - vanished - right out of the world." 

"What have you done to her?" 
"Sent her to - well - to another place." 
"What do you mean?" asked Digory. 
Uncle Andrew sat down and said, "Well, I'll tell you all about it. Have you ever heard of old Mrs 
Lefay?" 
"Wasn't she a great-aunt or something?" said Digory. 
"Not exactly," said Uncle Andrew. "She was my godmother. That's her, there, on the wall." 
Digory looked and saw a faded photograph: it showed the face of an old woman in a bonnet. And 
he could now remember that he had once seen a photo of the same face in an old drawer, at home, in the 
country. He had asked his Mother who it was and Mother had not seemed to want to talk about the subject 
much. It was not at all a nice face, Digory thought, though of course with those early photographs one 
could never really tell. 
"Was there - wasn't there - something wrong about her, Uncle Andrew?" he asked. 
"Well," said Uncle Andrew with a chuckle, "it depends what you call wrong. People are so 
narrow-minded. She certainly got very queer in later life. Did very unwise things. That was why they shut 
her up." 
"In an asylum, do you mean?" 
"Oh no, no, no," said Uncle Andrew in a shocked voice. "Nothing of that sort. Only in prison." 

"I say!" said Digory. "What had she done?" 
"Ah, poor woman," said Uncle Andrew. "She had been very unwise. There were a good many 
different things. We needn't go into all that. She was always very kind to me." 
"But look here, what has all this got to do with Polly? I do wish you'd -" 
"All in good time, my boy," said Uncle Andrew. "They let old Mrs Lefay out before she died and 
I was one of the very few people whom she would allow to see her in her last illness. She had got to 
dislike ordinary, ignorant people, you understand. I do myself. But she and I were interested in the same 
sort of things. It was only a few days before her death that she told me to go to an old bureau in her house 
and open a secret drawer and bring her a little box that I would find there. The moment I picked up that 
box I could tell by the pricking in my fingers that I held some great secret in my hands. She gave it me 
and made me promise that as soon as she was dead I would burn it, unopened, with certain ceremonies. 
That promise I did not keep." 
"Well, then, it was jolly rotten of you," said Digory. 
"Rotten?" said Uncle Andrew with a puzzled look. 
"Oh, I see. You mean that little boys ought to keep their promises. Very true: most right and 
proper, I'm sure, and I'm very glad you have been taught to do it. But of course you must understand that 
rules of that sort, however excellent they may be for little boys - and servants - and women - and even 
people in general, can't possibly be expected to apply to profound students and great thinkers and sages. 
No, Digory. Men like me, who possess hidden wisdom, are freed from common rules just as we are cut 
off from common pleasures. Ours, my boy, is a high and lonely destiny." 
As he said this he sighed and looked so grave and noble and mysterious that for a second Digory 
really thought he was saying something rather fine. But then he remembered the ugly look he had seen on 
his Uncle's face the moment before Polly had vanished: and all at once he saw through Uncle Andrew's 
grand words. "All it means," he said to himself, "Is that he thinks he can do anything he likes to get 
anything he wants." 

"Of course," said Uncle Andrew, "I didn't dare to open the box for a long time, for I knew it might 
contain something highly dangerous. For my godmother was a very remarkable woman. The truth is, she 
was one of the last mortals in this country who had fairy blood in her. (She said there had been two others 
in her time. One was a duchess and the other was a charwoman.) In fact, Digory, you are now talking to 
the last man (possibly) who really had a fairy godmother. There! That'll be something for you to 
remember when you are an old man yourself." 
"I bet she was a bad fairy," thought Digory; and added out loud. "But what about Polly?" 
"How you do harp on that!" said Uncle Andrew. "As if that was what mattered! My first task was 
of course to study the box itself. It was very ancient. And I knew enough even then to know that it wasn't 
Greek, or Old Egyptian, or Babylonian, or Hittite, or Chinese. It was older than any of those nations. Ah - 
that was a great day when I at last found out the truth. The box was Atlantean; it came from the lost island 
of Atlantis. That meant it was centuries older than any of the stone-age things they dig up in Europe. And 
it wasn't a rough, crude thing like them either. For in the very dawn of time Atlantis was already a great 
city with palaces and temples and learned men." 
He paused for a moment as if he expected Digory to say something. But Digory was disliking his 
Uncle more every minute, so he said nothing. 
"Meanwhile," continued Uncle Andrew, "I was learning a good deal in other ways (it wouldn't be 
proper to explain them to a child) about Magic in general. That meant that I came to have a fair idea what 
sort of things might be in the box. By various tests I narrowed down the possibilities. I had to get to know 
some - well, some devilish queer people, and go through some very disagreeable experiences. That was 
what turned my head grey. One doesn't become a magician for nothing. My health broke down in the end. 
But I got better. And at last I actually knew." 
Although there was not really the least chance of anyone overhearing them, he leaned forward 
and almost whispered as he said: 
"The Atlantean box contained something that had been brought from another world when our 
world was only just beginning." 
"What?" asked Digory, who was now interested in spite of himself. 

"Only dust," said Uncle Andrew. "Fine, dry dust. Nothing much to look at. Not much to show for 
a lifetime of toil, you might say. Ah, but when I looked at that dust (I took jolly good care not to touch it) 
and thought that every grain had once been in another world - I don't mean another planet, you know; 
they're part of our world and you could get to them if you went far enough - but a really Other World - 
another Nature another universe - somewhere you would never reach even if you travelled through the 
space of this universe for ever and ever - a world that could be reached only by Magic - well!" Here Uncle 
Andrew rubbed his hands till his knuckles cracked like fireworks. 
"I knew," he went on, "that if only you could get it into the right form, that dust would draw you 
back to the place it had come from. But the difficulty was to get it into the right form. My earlier 
experiments were all failures. I tried them on guinea-pigs. Some of them only died. Some exploded like 
little bombs -" 
"It was a jolly cruel thing to do," said Digory who had once had a guinea-pig of his own. 
"How you do keep getting off the point!" said Uncle Andrew. "That's what the creatures were for. 
I'd bought them myself. Let me see - where was I? Ah yes. At last I succeeded in making the rings: the 
yellow rings. But now a new difficulty arose. I was pretty sure, now, that a yellow ring would send any 
creature that touched it into the Other Pace. But what would be the good of that if I couldn't get them back 
to tell me what they had found there?" 
"And what about them?" said Digory. "A nice mess they'd be in if they couldn't get back!" 
"You will keep on looking at everything from the wrong point of view," said Uncle Andrew with 
a look of impatience. "Can't you understand that the thing is a great experiment? The whole point of 
sending anyone into the Other Place is that I want to find out what it's like." 
"Well why didn't you go yourself then?" 
Digory had hardly ever seen anyone so surprised and offended as his Uncle did at this simple 
question. "Me? Me?" he exclaimed. "The boy must be mad! A man at my time of life, and in my state of 
health, to risk the shock and the dangers of being flung suddenly into a different universe? I never heard 
anything so preposterous in my life! Do you realize what you're saying? Think what Another World 
means - you might meet anything anything." 

"And I suppose you've sent Polly into it then," said Digory. His cheeks were flaming with anger 
now. "And all I can say," he added, "even if you are my Uncle - is that you've behaved like a coward, 
sending a girl to a place you're afraid to go to yourself." 
"Silence, sir!" said Uncle Andrew, bringing his hand down on the table. "I will not be talked to 
like that by a little, dirty, schoolboy. You don't understand. I am the great scholar, the magician, the adept, 
who is doing the experiment. Of course I need subjects to do it on. Bless my soul, you'll be telling me 
next that I ought to have asked the guinea-pigs' permission before I used them! No great wisdom can be 
reached without sacrifice. But the idea of my going myself is ridiculous. It's like asking a general to fight 
as a common soldier. Supposing I got killed, what would become of my life's work?" 
"Oh, do stop jawing," said Digory. "Are you going to bring Polly back?" 
"I was going to tell you, when you so rudely interrupted me," said Uncle Andrew, "that I did at 
last find out a way of doing the return journey. The green rings draw you back." 
"But Polly hasn't got a green ring." 
"No " said Uncle Andrew with a 
cruel smile. 
"Then she can't get back," shouted Digory. "And it's exactly the same as if you'd murdered her. 
"She can get back," said Uncle Andrew, "if someone else will go after her, wearing a yellow ring 
himself and taking two green rings, one to bring himself back and one to bring her back." 
And now of course Digory saw the trap in which he was caught: and he stared at Uncle Andrew, 
saying nothing, with his mouth wide open. His cheeks had gone very pale. 

"I hope," said Uncle Andrew presently in a very high and mighty voice, just as if he were a 
perfect Uncle who had given one a handsome tip and some good advice, "I hope, Digory, you are not 
given to showing the white feather. I should be very sorry to think that anyone of our family had not 
enough honour and chivalry to go to the aid of - er - a lady in distress." 
"Oh shut up!" said Digory. "If you had any honour and all that, you'd be going yourself. But I 
know you won't. Alright. I see I've got to go. But you are a beast. I suppose you planned the whole thing, 
so that she'd go without knowing it and then I'd have to go after her." 
"Of course," said Uncle Andrew with his hateful smile. 
"Very well. I'll go. But there's one thing I jolly well mean to say first. I didn't believe in Magic till 
today. I see now it's real. Well if it is, I suppose all the old fairy tales are more or less true. And you're 
simply a wicked, cruel magician like the ones in the stories. Well, I've never read a story in which people 
of that sort weren't paid out in the end, and I bet you will be. And serve you right." 
Of all the things Digory had said this was the first that really went home. Uncle Andrew started 
and there came over his face a look of such horror that, beast though he was, you could almost feel sorry 
for him. But a second later he smoothed it all away and said with a rather forced laugh, "Well, well, I 
suppose that is a natural thing for a child to think - brought up among women, as you have been. Old 
wives' tales, eh? I don't think you need worry about my danger, Digory. Wouldn't it be better to worry 
about the danger of your little friend? She's been gone some time. If there are any dangers Over There - 
well, it would be a pity to arrive a moment too late." 
"A lot you care," said Digory fiercely. "But I'm sick of this jaw. What have I got to do?" 
"You really must learn to control that temper of yours, my boy," said Uncle Andrew coolly. 
"Otherwise you'll grow up like your Aunt Letty. Now. Attend to me." 
He got up, put on a pair of gloves, and walked over to the tray that contained the rings. 

"They only work," he said, "if they're actually touching your skin. Wearing gloves, I can pick 
them up - like this - and nothing happens. If you carried one in your pocket nothing would happen: but of 
course you'd have to be careful not to put your hand in your pocket and touch it by accident. The moment 
you touch a yellow ring, you vanish out of this world. When you are in the Other Place I expect - of 
course this hasn't been tested yet, but I expect - that the moment you touch a green ring you vanish out of 
that world and - I expect - reappear in this. Now. I take these two greens and drop them into your righthand 
pocket. Remember very carefully which pocket the greens are in. G for green and R for right. G.R. 
you see: which are the first two letters of green. One for you and one for the little girl. And now you pick 
up a yellow one for yourself. I should put it on on your finger - if I were you. There'll be less chance of 
dropping it." 
Digory had almost picked up the yellow ring when he suddenly checked himself. 
"Look here," he said. "What about Mother? Supposing she asks where I am?" 
"The sooner you go, the sooner you'll be back," said Uncle Andrew cheerfully. 
"But you don't really know whether I can get back." 
Uncle Andrew shrugged his shoulders, walked across to the door, unlocked it, threw it open, and 
said: 
"Oh very' well then. Just as you please. Go down and have your dinner. Leave the little girl to be 
eaten by wild animals or drowned or starved in Otherworld or lost there for good, if that's what you 
prefer. It's all one to me. Perhaps before tea time you'd better drop in on Mrs Plummer and explain that 
she'll never see her daughter again; because you were afraid to put on a ring." 
"By gum," said Digory, "don't I just wish I was big enough to punch your head!" 
Then he buttoned up his coat, took a deep breath, and picked up the ring. And he thought then, as 
he always thought afterwards too, that he could not decently have done anything else. 

UNCLE ANDREW and his study vanished instantly. Then, for a moment, everything became 
muddled. The next thing Digory knew was that there was a soft green light coming down on him from 
above, and darkness below. He didn't seem to be standing on anything, or sitting, or lying. Nothing 
appeared to be touching him. "I believe I'm in water," said Digory. "Or under water." This frightened him 
for a second, but almost at once he could feel that he was rushing upwards. Then his head suddenly came 
out into the air and, he found himself scrambling ashore, out on to smooth grassy ground at the edge of a 
pool. 
As he rose to his feet he noticed that he was neither dripping nor panting for breath as anyone 
would expect after being under water. His clothes were perfectly dry. He was standing by the edge of a 
small pool - not more than ten feet from side to side in a wood. The trees grew close together and were so 
leafy that he could get no glimpse of the sky. All the light was green light that came through the leaves: 
but there must have been a very strong sun overhead, for this green daylight was bright and warm. It was 
the quietest wood you could possibly imagine. There were no birds, no insects, no animals, and no wind. 
You could almost feel the trees growing. The pool he had just got out of was not the only pool. There 
were dozens of others - a pool every few yards as far as his eyes could reach. You could almost feel the 
trees drinking the water up with their roots. This wood was very much alive. When he tried to describe it 
afterwards 
Digory always said, "It was a rich place: as rich as plumcake." 
The strangest thing was that, almost before he had looked about him, Digory had half forgotten 
how he had come there. At any rate, he was certainly not thinking about Polly, or Uncle Andrew, or even 
his Mother. He was not in the least frightened, or excited, or curious. If anyone had asked him "Where did 
you come from?" he would probably have said, "I've always been here." That was what it felt like - as if 
one had always been in that place and never been bored although nothing had ever happened. As he said 
long afterwards, "It's not the sort of place where things happen. The trees go on growing, that's all." 
After Digory had looked at the wood for a long time he noticed that there was a girl lying on her 
back at the foot of a tree a few yards away. Her eyes were nearly shut but not quite, as if she were just 
between sleeping and waking. So he looked at her for a long time and said nothing. And at last she 
opened her eyes and looked at him for a long time and she also said nothing. Then she spoke, in a dreamy, 
contented sort of voice. 

"I think I've seen you before," she said. 
"I rather think so too," said Digory. "Have you been here long?" 
"Oh, always," said the girl. "At least - I don't know a very long time." 
"So have I," said Digory. 
"No you haven't, said she. "I've just seen you come up out of that pool." 
"Yes, I suppose I did," said Digory with a puzzled air, "I'd forgotten." 
Then for quite a long time neither said any more. 
"Look here," said the girl presently, "I wonder did we ever really meet before? I had a sort of idea 
- a sort of picture in my head - of a boy and a girl, like us - living somewhere quite different - and doing 
all sorts of things. Perhaps it was only a dream." 
"I've had that same dream, I think," said Digory. "About a boy and a girl, living next door - and 
something about crawling among rafters. I remember the girl had a dirty face." 
"Aren't you getting it mixed? In my dream it was the boy who had the dirty face." 
"I can't remember the boy's face," said Digory: and then added, "Hullo! What's that?" 

"Why! it's a guinea-pig," said the girl. And it was - a fat guinea-pig, nosing about in the grass. But 
round the middle of the guinea-pig there ran a tape, and, tied on to it by the tape, was a bright yellow ring. 
"Look! look," cried Digory, "The ring! And look! You've got one on your finger. And so have I." 
The girl now sat up, really interested at last. They stared very hard at one another, trying to 
remember. And then, at exactly the same moment, she shouted out "Mr Ketterley" and he shouted out 
"Uncle Andrew", and they knew who they were and began to remember the whole story. After a few 
minutes hard talking they had got it straight. Digory explained how beastly Uncle Andrew had been. 
"What do we do now?" said Polly. "Take the guineapig and go home?" 
"There's no hurry," said Digory with a huge yawn. 
"I think there is," said Polly. "This place is too quiet. It's so - so dreamy. You're almost asleep. If 
we once give in to it we shall just lie down and drowse for ever and ever." 
"It's very nice here," said Digory. 
"Yes, it is," said Polly. 
"But we've got to get back." She stood up and began to go cautiously towards the guinea-pig. But 
then she changed her mind. 
"We might as well leave the guinea-pig," she said. "It's perfectly happy here, and your uncle will 
only do something horrid to it if we take it home." 
"I bet he would," answered Digory. "Look at the way he's treated us. By the way, how do we get 
home?" 

"Go back into the pool, I expect." 
They came and stood together at the edge looking down into the smooth water. It was full of the 
reflection of the green, leafy branches; they made it look very deep. 
"We haven't any bathing things," said Polly. 
"We shan't need them, silly," said Digory. "We're going in with our clothes on. Don't you 
remember it didn't wet us on the way up?" 
"Can you swim?" 
"A bit. Can you?" 
"Well - not much." 
"I don't think we shall need to swim," said Digory "We want to go down, don't we?" 
Neither of them much liked the idea of jumping into that pool, but neither said so to the other. 
They took hands and said "One - Two - Three - Go" and jumped. There was a great splash and of course 
they closed their eyes. But when they opened them again they found they were still standing, hand in 
hand, in the green wood, and hardly up to their ankles in water. The pool was apparently only a couple of 
inches deep. They splashed back on to the dry ground. 
"What on earth's gone wrong?" said Polly in a frightened voice; but not quite so frightened as you 
might expect, because it is hard to feel really frightened in that wood. The place is too peaceful. 
"Oh! I know," said Digory, "Of course it won't work. We're still wearing our yellow rings. 

They're for the outward journey, you know. The green ones take you home. We must change rings. Have 
you got pockets? Good. Put your yellow ring in your left. I've got two greens. Here's one for you." 
They put on their green rings and came back to the pool. But before they tried another jump 
Digory gave a long "O-ooh!" 
"What's the matter?" said Polly. 
"I've just had a really wonderful idea," said Digory. "What are all the other pools?" 
"How do you mean?" 
"Why, if awe can get back to our own world by jumping into this pool, mightn't we get 
somewhere else by jumping into one of the others? Supposing there was a world at the bottom of every 
pool." 
"But I thought we were already in your Uncle Andrew's Other World or Other Place or whatever 
he called it. Didn't you say -" 
"Oh bother Uncle Andrew," interrupted Digory. "I don't believe he knows anything about it. He 
never had the pluck to come here himself. He only talked of one Other World. But suppose there were 
dozens?" 
"You mean, this wood might be only one of them?" 
"No, I don't believe this wood is a world at all. I think it's just a sort of in-between place." 
Polly looked puzzled. "Don't you see?" said Digory. "No, do listen. Think of our tunnel under the 
slates at home. It isn't a room in any of the houses. In a way, it isn't really part of any of the houses. But 
once you're in the tunnel you can go along it and come into any of the houses in the row. Mightn't this 

wood be the same? - a place that isn't in any of the worlds, but once you've found that place you can get 
into them all." 
"Well, even if you can -" began Polly, but Digory went on as if he hadn't heard her. 
"And of course that explains everything," he said. "That's why it is so quiet and sleepy here. 
Nothing ever happens here. Like at home. It's in the houses that people talk, and do things, and have 
meals. Nothing goes on in the inbetween places, behind the walls and above the ceilings and under the 
floor, or in our own tunnel. But when you come out of our tunnel you may find yourself in any house. I 
think we can get out of this place into jolly well Anywhere! We don't need to jump back into the same 
pool we came up by. Or not just yet." 
"The Wood between the Worlds," said Polly dreamily. "It sounds rather nice." 
"Come on," said Digory. "Which pool shall we try?" 
"Look here," said Polly, "I'm not going to try any new pool till we've made sure that we can get 
back by the old one. We're not even sure if it'll work yet." 
"Yes," said Digory. "And get caught by Uncle Andrew and have our rings taken away before 
we've had any fun. No thanks." 
"Couldn't we just go part of the way down into our own pool," said Polly. "Just to see if it works. 
Then if it does, we'll change rings and come up again before we're really back in Mr Ketterley's study." 
"Can we go part of the way down?" 
"Well, it took time coming up. I suppose it'll take a little time going back." 
Digory made rather a fuss about agreeing to this, but he had to in the end because Polly absolutely 

refused to do any exploring in new worlds until she had made sure about getting back to the old one. She 
was quite as brave as he about some dangers (wasps, for instance) but she was not so interested in finding 
out things nobody had ever heard of before; for Digory was the sort of person who wants to know 
everything, and when he grew up he became the famous Professor Kirke who comes into other books. 
After a good deal of arguing they agreed to put on their green rings ("Green for safety," said 
Digory, "so you can't help remembering which is which") and hold hands and jump. But as soon as they 
seemed to be getting back to Uncle Andrew's study, or even to their own world, Polly was to shout 
"Change" and they would slip off their greens and put on their yellows. Digory wanted to be the one who 
shouted "Change" but Polly wouldn't agree. 
They put on the green rings, took hands, and once more shouted "One -Two - Three - Go". This 
time it worked. It is very hard to tell you what it felt like, for everything happened so quickly. At first 
there were bright lights moving about in a black sky; Digory always thinks these were stars and even 
swears that he saw Jupiter quite close -close enough to see its moon. But almost at once there were rows 
and rows of roofs and chimney pots about them, and they could see St Paul's and knew they were looking 
at London. But you could see through the walls of all the houses. Then they could see Uncle Andrew, 
very vague and shadowy, but getting clearer and more solid-looking all the time, just as if he were coming 
into focus. But before he became quite real Polly shouted "Change", and they did change, and our world 
faded away like a dream, and the green light above grew stronger and stronger, till their heads came out of 
the pool and they scrambled ashore. And there was the wood all about them, as green and bright and still 
as ever. The whole thing had taken less than a minute. 
"There!" said Digory. "That's alright. Now for the adventure. Any pool will do. Come on. Let's try 
that one." 
"Stop!" said Polly- "Aren't we going to mark this pool?" 
They stared at each other and turned quite white as they realised the dreadful thing that Digory 
had just been going to do. For there were any number of pools in the wood, and the pools were all alike 
and the trees were all alike, so that if they had once left behind the pool that led to our own world without 
making some sort of landmark, the chances would have been a hundred to one against their ever finding it 
again. 
Digory's hand was shaking as he opened his penknife and cut out a long strip of turf on the bank 
of the pool. The soil (which smelled nice) was of a rich reddish brown and showed up well against the 
green. "It's a good thing one of us has some sense," said Polly. 

"Well don't keep on gassing about it," said Digory. "Come along, I want to see what's in one of 
the other pools." And Polly gave him a pretty sharp answer and he said something even nastier in reply. 
The quarrel lasted for several minutes but it would be dull to write it all down. Let us skip on to the 
moment at which they stood with beating hearts and rather scared faces on the edge of the unknown pool 
with their yellow rings on and held hands and once more said "One - Two - Three - Go!" 
Splash! Once again it hadn't worked. This pool, too, appeared to be only a puddle. Instead of 
reaching a new world they only got their feet wet and splashed their legs for the second time that morning 
(if it was a morning: it seems to be always the same time in the Wood between the Worlds). 
"Blast and botheration!" exclaimed Digory. "What's gone wrong now? We've put our yellow rings 
on all right. He said yellow for the outward journey." 
Now the truth was that Uncle Andrew, who knew nothing about the Wood between the Worlds, 
had quite a wrong idea about the rings. The yellow ones weren't "outward" rings and the green ones 
weren't "homeward" rings; at least, not in the way he thought. The stuff of which both were made had all 
come from the wood. The stuff in the yellow rings had the power of drawing you into the wood; it was 
stuff that wanted to get back to its own place, the in-between place. But the stuff in the green rings is stuff 
that is trying to get out of its own place: so that a green ring would take you out of the wood into a world. 
Uncle Andrew, you see, was working with things he did not really understand; most magicians are. Of 
course Digory did not realize the truth quite clearly either, or not till later. But when they had talked it 
over, they decided to try their green rings on the new pool, just to see what happened. 
"I'm game if you are," said Polly. But she really said this because, in her heart of hearts, she now 
felt sure that neither kind of ring was going to work at all in the new pool, and so there was nothing worse 
to be afraid of than another splash. I am not quite sure that Digory had not the same feeling. At any rate, 
when they had both put on their greens and come back to the edge of the water, and taken hands again, 
they were certainly a good deal more cheerful and less solemn than they had been the first time. 
"One - Two - Three - Go!" said Digory. And they jumped. 

THERE was no doubt about the Magic this time. Down and down they rushed, first through 
darkness and then through a mass of vague and whirling shapes which might have been almost anything. 
It grew lighter. Then suddenly they felt that they were standing on something solid. A moment later 
everything came into focus and they were able to look about them. 
"What a queer place!" said Digory. 
"I don't like it," said Polly with something like a shudder. 
What they noticed first was the light. It wasn't like sunlight, and it wasn't like electric light, or 
lamps, or candles, or any other light they had ever seen. It was a dull, rather red light, not at all cheerful. It 
was steady and did not flicker. They were standing on a flat paved surface and buildings rose all around 
them. There was no roof overhead; they were in a sort of courtyard. The sky was extraordinarily dark - a 
blue that was almost black. When you had seen that sky you wondered that there should be any light at 
all. 
"It's very funny weather here," said Digory. "I wonder if we've arrived just in time for a 
thunderstorm; or an eclipse." 
"I don't like it," said Polly. 
Both of them, without quite knowing why, were talking in whispers. And though there was no 
reason why they should still go on holding hands after their jump, they didn't let go. 
The walls rose very high all round that courtyard. They had many great windows in them, 
windows without glass, through which you saw nothing but black darkness. Lower down there were great 
pillared arches, yawning blackly like the mouths of railway tunnels. It was rather cold. 
The stone of which everything was built seemed to be red, but that might only be because of the 
curious light. It was obviously very old. Many of the flat stones that paved the courtyard had cracks 

across them. None of them fitted closely together and the sharp corners were all worn off. One of the 
arched doorways was half filled up with rubble. The two children kept on turning round and round to look 
at the different sides of the courtyard. One reason was that they were afraid of somebody - or something - 
looking out of those windows at them when their backs were turned. 
"Do you think anyone lives here?" said Digory at last, still in a whisper. 
"No," said Polly. "It's all in ruins. We haven't heard a sound since we came." 
"Let's stand still and listen for a bit," suggested Digory. 
They stood still and listened, but all they could hear was the thump-thump of their own hearts. 
This place was at least as quiet as the Wood between the Worlds. But it was a different kind of quietness. 
The silence of the Wood had been rich and warm (you could almost hear the trees growing) and full of 
life: this was a dead, cold, empty silence. You couldn't imagine anything growing in it. 
"Let's go home," said Polly. 
"But we haven't seen anything yet," said Digory. "Now we're here, we simply must have a look 
round." 
"I'm sure there's nothing at all interesting here." 
"There's not much point in finding a magic ring that lets you into other worlds if you're afraid to 
look at them when you've got there." 
"Who's talking about being afraid?" said Polly, letting go of Digory's hand. 
"I only thought you didn't seem very keen on exploring this place." 

"I'll go anywhere you go." 
"We can get away the moment we want to," said Digory. "Let's take off our green rings and put 
them in our right-hand pockets. All we've got to do is to remember that our yellow are in our left-hand 
pockets. You can keep your hand as near your pocket as you like, but don't put it in or you'll touch your 
yellow and vanish." 
They did this and went quietly up to one of the big arched doorways which led into the inside of 
the building. And when they stood on the threshold and could look in, they saw it was not so dark inside 
as they had thought at first. It led into a vast, shadowy hall which appeared to be empty; but on the far 
side there was a row of pillars with arches between them and through those arches there streamed in some 
more of the same tired-looking light. They crossed the hall, walking very carefully for fear of holes in the 
floor or of anything lying about that they might trip over. It seemed a long walk. When they had reached 
the other side they came out through the arches and found themselves in another and larger courtyard. 
"That doesn't look very safe," said Polly, pointing at a place where the wall bulged outward and 
looked as if it were ready to fall over into the courtyard. In one place a pillar was missing between two 
arches and the bit that came down to where the top of the pillar ought to have been hung there with 
nothing to support it. Clearly, the place had been deserted for hundreds, perhaps thousands, of years. 
"If it's lasted till now, I suppose it'll last a bit longer," said Digory. "But we must be very quiet. 
You know a noise sometimes brings things down - like an avalanche in the Alps." 
They went on out of that courtyard into another doorway, and up a great flight of steps and 
through vast rooms that opened out of one another till you were dizzy with the mere size of the place. 
Every now and then they thought they were going to get out into the open and see what sort of country lay 
around the enormous palace. But each time they only got into another courtyard. They must have been 
magnificent places when people were still living there. In one there had once been a fountain. A great 
stone monster with wide-spread wings stood with its mouth open and you could still see a bit of piping at 
the back of its mouth, out of which the water used to pour. Under it was a wide stone basin to hold the 
water; but it was as dry as a bone. In other places there were the dry sticks of some sort of climbing plant 
which had wound itself round the pillars and helped to pull some of them down. But it had died long ago. 
And there were no ants or spiders or any of the other living things you expect to see in a ruin; and where 
the dry earth showed between the broken flagstones there was no grass or moss. 
It was all so dreary and all so much the same that even Digory was thinking they had better put on 

their yellow rings and get back to the warm, green, living forest of the In-between place, when they came 
to two huge doors of some metal that might possibly be gold. One stood a little ajar. So of course they 
went to look in. Both started back and drew a long breath: for here at last was something worth seeing. 
For a second they thought the room was full of people - hundreds of people, all seated, and all 
perfectly still. Polly and Digory, as you may guess, stood perfectly still themselves for a good long time, 
looking in. But presently they decided that what they were looking at could not be real people. There was 
not a movement nor the sound of a breath among them all. They were like the most wonderful waxworks 
you ever saw. 
This time Polly took the lead. There was something in this room which interested her more than it 
interested Digory: all the figures were wearing magnificent clothes. If you were interested in clothes at all, 
you could hardly help going in to see them closer. And the blaze of their colours made this room look, not 
exactly cheerful, but at any rate rich and majestic after all the dust and emptiness of the others. It had 
more windows, too, and was a good deal lighter. 
I can hardly describe the clothes. The figures were all robed and had crowns on their heads. Their 
robes were of crimson and silvery grey and deep purple and vivid green: and there were patterns, and 
pictures of flowers and strange beasts, in needlework all over them. Precious stones of astonishing size 
and brightness stared from their crowns and hung in chains round their necks and peeped out from all the 
places where anything was fastened. 
"Why haven't these clothes all rotted away long ago?" asked Polly. 
"Magic," whispered Digory. "Can't you feel it? I bet this whole room is just stiff with 
enchantments. I could feel it the moment we came in." 
"Any one of these dresses would cost hundreds of pounds," said Polly. 
But Digory was more interested in the faces, and indeed these were well worth looking at. The 
people sat in their stone chairs on each side of the room and the floor was left free down the middle. You 
could walk down and look at the faces in turn. 
"They were nice people, I think," said Digory. 

Polly nodded. All the faces they could see were certainly nice. Both the men and women looked 
kind and wise, and they seemed to come of a handsome race. But after the children had gone a few steps 
down the room they came to faces that looked a little different. These were very solemn faces. You felt 
you would have to mind your P's and Q's, if you ever met living people who looked like that. When they 
had gone a little further, they found themselves among faces they didn't like: this was about the middle of 
the room. The faces here looked very strong and proud and happy, but they looked cruel. A little further 
on they looked crueller. Further on again, they were still cruel but they no longer looked happy. They 
were even despairing faces: as if the people they belonged to had done dreadful things and also suffered 
dreadful things. The last figure of all was the most interesting - a woman even more richly dressed than 
the others, very tall (but every figure in that room was taller than the people of our world), with a look of 
such fierceness and pride that it took your breath away. Yet she was beautiful too. Years afterwards when 
he was an old man, Digory said he had never in all his life known a woman so beautiful. It is only fair to 
add that Polly always said she couldn't see anything specially beautiful about her. 
This woman, as I said, was the last: but there were plenty of empty chairs beyond her, as if the 
room had been intended for a much larger collection of images. 
"I do wish we knew the story that's behind all this," said Digory. "Let's go back and look at that 
table sort of thing in the middle of the room." 
The thing in the middle of the room was not exactly a table. It was a square pillar about four feet 
high and on it there rose a little golden arch from which there hung a little golden bell; and beside this 
there lay a little golden hammer to hit the bell with. 
"I wonder... I wonder... I wonder..." said Digory. 
"There seems to be something written here," said Polly, stooping down and looking at the side of 
the pillar. 
"By gum, so there is," said Digory. "But of course we shan't be able to read it." 
"Shan't we? I'm not so sure," said Polly. 

They both looked at it hard and, as you might have expected, the letters cut in the stone were 
strange. But now a great wonder happened: for, as they looked, though the shape of the strange letters 
never altered, they found that they could understand them. If only Digory had remembered what he 
himself had said a few minutes ago, that this was an enchanted room, he might have guessed that the 
enchantment was beginning to work. But he was too wild with curiosity to think about that. He was 
longing more and more to know what was written on the pillar. And very soon they both knew. What it 
said was something like this - at least this is the sense of it though the poetry, when you read it there, was 
better: 
Make your choice, adventurous Stranger; Strike the bell and bide the danger, Or wonder, till it 
drives you mad, What would have followed if you had. 
"No fear!" said Polly. "We don't want any danger." 
"Oh but don't you see it's no good!" said Digory. "We can't get out of it now. We shall always be 
wondering what else would have happened if we had struck the bell. I'm not going home to be driven mad 
by always thinking of that. No fear!" 
"Don't be so silly," said Polly. "As if anyone would! What does it matter what would have 
happened?" 
"I expect anyone who's come as far as this is bound to go on wondering till it sends him dotty. 
That's the Magic of it, you see. I can feel it beginning to work on me already." 
"Well I don't," said Polly crossly. "And I don't believe you do either. You're just putting it on." 
"That's all you know," said Digory. "It's because you're a girl. Girls never want to know anything 
but gossip and rot about people getting engaged." 
"You looked exactly like your Uncle when you said that," said Polly. 

"Why can't you keep to the point?" said Digory. "What we're talking about is -" 
"How exactly like a man!" said Polly in a very grownup voice; but she added hastily, in her real 
voice, "And don't say I'm just like a woman, or you'll be a beastly copy-cat." 
"I should never dream of calling a kid like you a woman," said Digory loftily. 
"Oh, I'm a kid, am I?" said Polly who was now in a real rage. "Well you needn't be bothered by 
having a kid with you any longer then. I'm off. I've had enough of this place. And I've had enough of you 
too - you beastly, stuck-up, obstinate pig!" 
"None of that!" said Digory in a voice even nastier than he meant it to be; for he saw Polly's hand 
moving to her pocket to get hold of her yellow ring. I can't excuse what he did next except by saying that 
he was very sorry for it afterwards (and so were a good many other people). Before Polly's hand reached 
her pocket, he grabbed her wrist, leaning across with his back against her chest. Then, keeping her other 
arm out of the way with his other elbow, he leaned forward, picked up the hammer, and struck the golden 
bell a light, smart tap. Then he let her go and they fell apart staring at each other and breathing hard. Polly 
was just beginning to cry, not with fear, and not even because he had hurt her wrist quite badly, but with 
furious anger. Within two seconds, however, they had something to think about that drove their own 
quarrels quite out of their minds. 
As soon as the bell was struck it gave out a note, a sweet note such as you might have expected, 
and not very loud. But instead of dying away again, it went on; and as it went on it grew louder. Before a 
minute had passed it was twice as loud as it had been to begin with. It was soon so loud that if the 
children had tried to speak (but they weren't thinking of speaking now - they were just standing with their 
mouths open) they would not have heard one another. Very soon it was so loud that they could not have 
heard one another even by shouting. And still it grew: all on one note, a continuous sweet sound, though 
the sweetness had something horrible about it, till all the air in that great room was throbbing with it and 
they could feel the stone floor trembling under their feet. Then at last it began to be mixed with another 
sound, a vague, disastrous noise which sounded first like the roar of a distant train, and then like the crash 
of a falling tree. They heard something like great weights falling. Finally, with a sudden, rush and 
thunder, and a shake that nearly flung them off their feet, about a quarter of the roof at one end of the 
room fell in, great blocks of masonry fell all round them, and the walls rocked. The noise of the bell 
stopped. The clouds of dust cleared away. Everything became quiet again. 
It was never found out whether the fall of the roof was due to Magic or whether that unbearably 
loud sound from the bell just happened to strike the note which was more than those crumbling walls 

could stand. 
"There! I hope you're satisfied now," panted Polly. 
"Well, it's all over, anyway," said Digory. 
And both thought it was; but they had never been more mistaken in their lives. 
THE children were facing one another across the pillar where the bell hung, still trembling, 
though it no longer gave out any note. Suddenly they heard a soft noise from the end of the room which 
was still undamaged. They turned quick as lightning to see what it was. One of the robed figures, the 
furthest-off one of all, the woman whom Digory thought so beautiful, was rising from its chair. When she 
stood up they realised that she was even taller than they had thought. And you could see at once, not only 
from her crown and robes, but from the flash of her eyes and the curve of her lips, that she was a great 
queen. She looked round the room and saw the damage and saw the children, but you could not guess 
from her face what she thought of either or whether she was surprised. She came forward with long, swift 
strides. 
"Who has awaked me? Who has broken the spell?" she asked. 
"I think it must have been me," said Digory. 
"You!" said the Queen, laying her hand on his shoulder - a white, beautiful hand, but Digory 
could feel that it was strong as steel pincers. "You? But you are only a child, a common child. Anyone can 
see at a glance that you have no drop of royal or noble blood in your veins. How did such as you dare to 

enter this house?" 
"We've come from another world; by Magic," said Polly, who thought it was high time the Queen 
took some notice of her as well as of Digory. 
"Is this true?" said the Queen, still looking at Digory and not giving Polly even a glance. 
"Yes, it is," said he. 
The Queen put her other hand under his chin and forced it up so that she could see his face better. 
Digory tried to stare back but he soon had to let his eyes drop. There was something about hers that 
overpowered him. 
After she had studied him for well over a minute, she let go of his chin and said: 
"You are no magician. The mark of it is not on you. You must be only the servant of a magician. 
It is on another's Magic that you have travelled here." 
"It was my Uncle Andrew," said Digory. 
At the moment, not in the room itself but from somewhere very close, there came, first a 
rumbling, then a creaking, and then a roar of falling masonry, and the floor shook. 
"There is great peril here," said the Queen. "The whole palace is breaking up. If we are not out of 
it in a few minutes we shall be buried under the ruin." She spoke as calmly as if she had been merely 
mentioning the time of day. "Come," she added, and held out a hand to each of the children. Polly, who 
was disliking the Queen and feeling rather sulky, would not have let her hand be taken if she could have 
helped it. But though the Queen spoke so calmly, her movements were as quick as thought. Before Polly 
knew what was happening her left hand had been caught in a hand so much larger and stronger than her 
own that she could do nothing about it. 

"This is a terrible woman," thought Polly. "She's strong enough to break my arm with one twist. 
And now that she's got my left hand I can't get at my yellow ring. If I tried to stretch across and get my 
right hand into my left pocket I mightn't be able to reach it, before she asked me what I was doing. 
Whatever happens we mustn't let her know about the rings. I do hope Digory has the sense to keep his 
mouth shut. I wish I could get a word with him alone." 
The Queen led them out of the Hall of Images into a long corridor and then through a whole maze 
of halls and stairs and courtyards. Again and again they heard parts of the great palace collapsing, 
sometimes quite close to them. Once a huge arch came thundering down only a moment after they had 
passed through it. The Queen was walking quickly - the children had to trot to keep up with her but she 
showed no sign of fear. Digory thought, "She's wonderfully brave. And strong. She's what I call a Queen! 
I do hope she's going to tell us the story of this place." 
She did tell them certain things as they went along: 
"That is the door to the dungeons," she would say, or "That passage leads to the principal torture 
chambers," or "This was the old banqueting hall where my greatgrandfather bade seven hundred nobles to 
a feast and killed them all before they had drunk their fill. They had had rebellious thoughts." 
They came at last into a hall larger and loftier than any they had yet seen. From its size and from 
the great doors at the far end, Digory thought that now at last they must be coming to the main entrance. 
In this he was quite right. The doors were dead black, either ebony or some black metal which is not 
found in our world. They were fastened with great bars, most of them too high to reach and all too heavy 
to lift. He wondered how they would get out. 
The Queen let go of his hand and raised her arm. She drew herself up to her full height and stood 
rigid. Then she said something which they couldn't understand (but it sounded horrid) and made an action 
as if she were throwing something towards the doors. And those high and heavy doors trembled for a 
second as if they were made of silk and then crumbled away till there was nothing left of them but a heap 
of dust on the threshold. 
"Whew!" whistled Digory. 
"Has your master magician, your uncle, power like mine?" asked the Queen, firmly seizing 
Digory's hand again. "But I shall know later. In the meantime, remember what you have seen. This is 

what happens to things, and to people, who stand in my way." 
Much more light than they had yet seen in that country was pouring in through the now empty 
doorway, and when the Queen led them out through it they were not surprised to find themselves in the 
open air. The wind that blew in their faces was cold, yet somehow stale. They were looking from a high 
terrace and there was a great landscape out below them. 
Low down and near the horizon hung a great, red sun, far bigger than our sun. Digory felt at once 
that it was also older than ours: a sun near the end of its life, weary of looking down upon that world. To 
the left of the sun, and higher up, there was a single star, big and bright. Those were the only two things to 
be seen in the dark sky; they made a dismal group. And on the earth, in every direction, as far as the eye 
could reach, there spread a vast city in which there was no living thing to be seen. And all the temples, 
towers, palaces, pyramids, and bridges cast long, disastrous-looking shadows in the light of that withered 
sun. Once a great river had flowed through the city, but the water had long since vanished, and it was now 
only a wide ditch of grey dust. 
"Look well on that which no eyes will ever see again," said the Queen. "Such was Charn, that 
great city, the city of the King of Kings, the wonder of the world, perhaps of all worlds. Does your uncle 
rule any city as great as this, boy?" 
"No," said Digory. He was going to explain that Uncle Andrew didn't rule any cities, but the 
Queen went on: 
"It is silent now. But I have stood here when the whole air was full of the noises of Charn; the 
trampling of feet, the creaking of wheels, the cracking of the whips and the groaning of slaves, the 
thunder of chariots, and the sacrificial drums beating in the temples. I have stood here (but that was near 
the end) when the roar of battle went up from every street and the river of Charn ran red." She paused and 
added, "All in one moment one woman blotted it out for ever." 
"Who?" said Digory in a faint voice; but he had already guessed the answer. 
"I," said the Queen. "I, Jadis the last Queen, but the Queen of the World." 
The two children stood silent, shivering in the cold wind. 

"It was my sister's fault," said the Queen. "She drove me to it. May the curse of all the Powers rest 
upon her forever! At any moment I was ready to make peace - yes and to spare her life too, if only she 
would yield me the throne. But she would not. Her pride has destroyed the whole world. Even after the 
war had begun, there was a solemn promise that neither side would use Magic. But when she broke her 
promise, what could I do? Fool! As if she did not know that I had more Magic than she! She even knew 
that I had the secret of the Deplorable Word. Did she think - she was always a weakling - that I would not 
use it?" 
"What was it?" said Digory. 
"That was the secret of secrets," said the Queen Jadis. "It had long been known to the great kings 
of our race that there was a word which, if spoken with the proper ceremonies, would destroy all living 
things except the one who spoke it. But the ancient kings were weak and softhearted and bound 
themselves and all who should come after them with great oaths never even to seek after the knowledge of 
that word. But I learned it in a secret place and paid a terrible price to learn it. I did not use it until she 
forced me to it. I fought to overcome her by every other means. I poured out the blood of my armies like 
water -" 
"Beast!" muttered Polly. 
"The last great battle," said the Queen, "raged for three days here in Charn itself. For three days I 
looked down upon it from this very spot. I did not use my power till the last of my soldiers had fallen, and 
the accursed woman, my sister, at the head of her rebels was halfway up those great stairs that lead up 
from the city to the terrace. Then I waited till we were so close that we could see one another's faces. She 
flashed her horrible, wicked eyes upon me and said, "Victory." "Yes," said I, "Victory, but not yours." 
Then I spoke the Deplorable Word. A moment later I was the only living thing beneath the sun.", 
"But the people?" gasped Digory. 
"What people, boy?" asked the Queen. 
"All the ordinary people," said Polly, "who'd never done you any harm. And the women, and the 
children, and the animals." 

"Don't you understand?" said the Queen (still speaking to Digory). "I was the Queen. They were 
all my people. What else were they there for but to do my will?" 
"It was rather hard luck on them, all the same," said he. 
"I had forgotten that you are only a common boy. How should you understand reasons of State? 
You must learn, child, that what would be wrong for you or for any of the common people is not wrong in 
a great Queen such as I. The weight of the world is on our shoulders. We must be freed from all rules. 
Ours is a high and lonely destiny." 
Digory suddenly remembered that Uncle Andrew had used exactly the same words. But they 
sounded much grander when Queen Jadis said them; perhaps because Uncle Andrew was not seven feet 
tall and dazzlingly beautiful. 
"And what did you do then?" said Digory. 
"I had already cast strong spells on the hall where the images of my ancestors sit. And the force of 
those spells was that I should sleep among them, like an image myself, and need neither food nor fire, 
though it were a thousand years, till one came and struck the bell and awoke me." 
"Was it the Deplorable Word that made the sun like that?" asked Digory. 
"Like what?" said Jadis 
"So big, so red, and so cold." 
"It has always been so," said Jadis. "At least, for hundreds of thousands of years. Have you a 
different sort of sun in your world?" 

"Yes, it's smaller and yellower. And it gives a good deal more heat." 
The Queen gave a long drawn "A-a-ah!" And Digory saw on her face that same hungry and 
greedy look which he had lately seen on Uncle Andrew's. "So," she said, "yours is a younger world." 
She paused for a moment to look once more at the deserted city - and if she was sorry for all the 
evil she had done there, she certainly didn't show it - and then said: "Now, let us be going. It is cold here 
at the end of all a the ages." 
"Going where?" asked both the children. 
"Where?" repeated Jadis in surprise. "To your world, of course." 
Polly and Digory looked at each other, aghast. Polly had disliked the Queen from the first; and 
even Digory, now that he had heard the story, felt that he had seen quite as much of her as he wanted. 
Certainly, she was not at all the sort of person one would like to take home. And if they did like, they 
didn't know how they could. What they wanted was to get away themselves: but Polly couldn't get at her 
ring and of course Digory couldn't go without her. Digory got very red in the face and stammered. 
"Oh - oh - our world. I d-didn't know you wanted to go there." 
"What else were you sent here for if not to fetch me?" asked Jadis. 
"I'm sure you wouldn't like our world at all," said Digory. "It's not her sort of place, is it Polly? 
It's very dull; not worth seeing, really." 
"It will soon be worth seeing when I rule it," answered the Queen. 

"Oh, but you can't," said Digory. "It's not like that. They wouldn't let you, you know." 
The Queen gave a contemptuous smile. "Many great kings," she said, "thought they could stand 
against the House of Charn. But they all fell, and their very names are forgotten. Foolish boy! Do you 
think that I, with my beauty and my Magic, will not have your whole world at my feet before a year has 
passed? Prepare your incantations and take me there at once." 
"This is perfectly frightful," said Digory to Polly. 
"Perhaps you fear for this Uncle of yours," said Jadis. "But if he honours me duly, he shall keep 
his life and his throne. I am not coming to fight against him. He must be a very great Magician, if he has 
found how to send you here. Is he King of your whole world or only of part?" 
"He isn't King of anywhere," said Digory. 
"You are lying," said the Queen. "Does not Magic always go with the royal blood? Who ever 
heard of common people being Magicians? I can see the truth whether you speak it or not. Your Uncle is 
the great King and the great Enchanter of your world. And by his art he has seen the shadow of my face, 
in some magic mirror or some enchanted pool; and for the love of my beauty he has made a potent spell 
which shook your world to its foundations and sent you across the vast gulf between world and world to 
ask my favour and to bring me to him. Answer me: is that not how it was?" 
"Well, not exactly," said Digory. 
"Not exactly," shouted Polly. "Why, it's absolute bosh from beginning to end." 
"Minions!" cried the Queen, turning in rage upon Polly and seizing her hair, at the very top of her 
head where it hurts most. But in so doing she let go of both the children's hands. "Now," shouted Digory; 
and "Quick! shouted Polly. They plunged their left hands into their pockets. They did not even need to put 
the rings on. The moment they touched them, the whole of that dreary, world vanished from their eyes. 
They were rushing upward and a warm green light was growing nearer over head. 

"LET go! Let go!" screamed Polly. 
"I'm not touching you!" said Digory. 
Then their heads came out of the pool and, once more, the sunny quietness of the Wood between 
the Worlds was all about them, and it seemed richer and warmer and more peaceful than ever after the 
staleness and ruin of the place they had just left. I think that, if they had been given the chance, they 
would again have forgotten who they were and where they came from and would have lain down and 
enjoyed themselves, half asleep, listening to the growing of the trees. But this time there was something 
that kept them as wide-awake as possible: for as soon as they had got out on to the grass, they found that 
they were not alone. The Queen, or the Witch (whichever you like to call her) had come up with them, 
holding on fast by Polly's hair. That was why Polly had been shouting out "Let go!" 
This proved, by the way, another thing about the rings which Uncle Andrew hadn't told Digory 
because he didn't know it himself. In order to jump from world to world by one of those rings you don't 
need to be wearing or touching it yourself; it is enough if you are touching someone who is touching it. In 
that way they work like a magnet; and everyone knows that if you pick up a pin with a magnet, any other 
pin which is touching the first pin will come too. 
Now that you saw her in the wood, Queen Jadis looked different. She was much paler than she 
had been; so pale that hardly any of her beauty was left. And she was stooped and seemed to be finding it 
hard to breathe, as if the air of that place stifled her. Neither of the children felt in the least afraid of her 
now. 
"Let go! Let go of my hair," said Polly. "What do you mean by it?" 
"Here! Let go of her hair. At once," said Digory. 

They both turned and struggled with her. They were stronger than she and in a few seconds they 
had forced her to let go. She reeled back, panting, and there was a look of terror in her eyes. 
"Quick, Digory!" said Polly. "Change rings and into' the home pool." 
"Help! Help! Mercy!" cried the Witch in a faint voice, staggering after them. "Take me with you. 
You cannot. mean to leave me in this horrible place. It is killing me." 
"It's a reason of State," said Polly spitefully. "Like when you killed all those people in your own 
world. Do be quick, Digory." They had put on their green rings, but Digory said: 
"Oh bother! What are we to do?" He couldn't help feeling a little sorry for the Queen. 
"Oh don't be such an ass," said Polly. "Ten to one she's only shamming. Do come on." And then 
both children plunged into the home pool. "It's a good thing we made that mark," thought Polly. But as 
they jumped Digory felt that a large cold finger and thumb had caught him by the ear. And as they sank 
down and the confused shapes of our own world began to appear, the grip of that finger and thumb grew 
stronger. The Witch was apparently recovering her strength. Digory struggled and kicked, but it was not 
of the least use. In a moment they found themselves in Uncle Andrew's study; and there was Uncle 
Andrew himself, staring at the wonderful creature that Digory had brought back from beyond the world. 
And well he might stare. Digory and Polly stared too. There was no doubt that the Witch had got 
over her faintness; and now that one saw her in our own world, with ordinary things around her, she fairly 
took one's breath away. In Charn she had been alarming enough: in London, she was terrifying. For one 
thing, they had not realised till now how very big she was. "Hardly human" was what Digory thought 
when he looked at her; and he may have been right, for some say there is giantish blood in the royal 
family of Charn. But even her height was nothing compared with her beauty, her fierceness, and her 
wildness. She looked ten times more alive than most of the people one meets in London. Uncle Andrew 
was bowing and rubbing his hands and looking, to tell the truth, extremely frightened. He seemed a little 
shrimp of a creature beside the Witch. And yet, as Polly said after 
wards, there was a sort of likeness between her face and his, something in the expression. It was 
the look that all wicked Magicians have, the "Mark" which Jadis had said she could not find in Digory's 

face. One good thing about seeing the two together was that you would never again be afraid of Uncle 
Andrew, any more than you'd be afraid of a worm after you had met a rattlesnake or afraid of a cow after 
you had met a mad bull. 
"Pooh!" thought Digory to himself. "Him a Magician! 
Not much. Now she's the real thing." 
Uncle Andrew kept on rubbing his hands and bowing. He was trying to say something very polite, 
but his mouth had gone all dry so that he could not speak. His "experiment" with the rings, as he called it, 
was turning out more successful than he liked: for though he had dabbled in Magic for years he had 
always left all the dangers (as far as one can) to other people. Nothing at all like this had ever happened to 
him before. 
Then Jadis spoke; not very loud, but there was something in her voice that made the whole room 
quiver. 
"Where is the Magician who has called me into this world?" 
"Ah - ah - Madam," gasped Uncle Andrew, "I am most honoured - highly gratified - a most 
unexpected, pleasure - if only I had had the opportunity of making any preparations - I - I -" 
"Where is the Magician, Fool?" said Jadis. 
"I - I am, 'Madam. I hope you will excuse any - er -. liberty these naughty children may have 
taken. I assure you, there was no intention -" 
"You?" said the Queen in a still more terrible voice. Then, in one stride, she crossed the room, 
seized a great handful of Uncle Andrew's grey hair and pulled his head back so that his face looked up 
into hers. Then she studied his face as she had studied Digory's face in the palace of Charn. He blinked 
and licked his lips nervously all the time. At last she let him go: so suddenly that he reeled back against 
the wall. 

"I see," she said scornfully, "you are a Magician - of a sort. Stand up, dog, and don't sprawl there 
as if you were speaking to your equals. How do you come to know Magic? You are not of royal blood, I'll 
swear." 
"Well - ah - not perhaps in the strict sense," stammered Uncle Andrew. "Not exactly royal, 
Ma'am. The Ketterleys are, however, a very old family. An old Dorsetshire family, Ma'am." 
"Peace," said the Witch. "I see what you are. You are a little, peddling Magician who works by 
rules and books. There is no real Magic in your blood and heart. Your kind was made an end of in my 
world a thousand years ago. But here I shall allow you to be my servant." 
"I should be most happy - delighted to be of any service - a p-pleasure, I assure you." 
"Peace! You talk far too much. Listen to your first task. I see we are in a large city. Procure for 
me at once a chariot or a flying carpet or a well-trained dragon, or whatever is usual for royal and noble 
persons in your land. Then bring me to places where I can get clothes and jewels and slaves fit for my 
rank. Tomorrow I will begin the conquest of the world." 
"I - I - I'll go and order a cab at once," gasped Uncle Andrew. 
"Stop," said the Witch, just as he reached the door. "Do not dream of treachery. My eyes can see 
through walls and into the minds of men. They will be on you wherever you go. At the first sign of 
disobedience I will lay such spells on you that anything you sit down on will feel like red hot iron and 
whenever you lie in a bed there will be invisible blocks of ice at your feet. Now go." 
The old man went out, looking like a dog with its tail between its legs. 
The children were now afraid that Jadis would have something to say to them about what had 
happened in the wood. As it turned out, however, she never mentioned it either then or afterwards. I think 
(and Digory thinks too) that her mind was of a sort which cannot remember that quiet place at all, and 
however often you took her there and however long you left her there, she would still know nothing about 

it. Now that she was left alone with the children, she took no notice of either of them. And that was like 
her too. In Charn she had taken no notice of Pony (till the very end) because Digory was the one she 
wanted to make use of. Now that she had Uncle Andrew, she took no notice of Digory. I expect most 
witches are like that. They are not interested in things or people unless they can use them; they are terribly 
practical. So there was silence in the room for a minute or two. But you could tell by the way Jadis tapped 
her foot on the floor that she was growing impatient. 
Presently she said, as if to herself, "What is the old fool doing? I should have brought a whip." 
She stalked out of the room in pursuit of Uncle Andrew without one glance at the children. 
"Whew!" said Polly, letting out a long breath of relief. "And now I must get home. It's frightfully 
late. I shall catch it." 
"Well do, do come back as soon as you can," said Digory. "This is simply ghastly, having her 
here. We must make some sort of plan." 
"That's up to your Uncle now," said Polly. "It was he who started all this messing about with 
Magic." 
"All the same, you will come back, won't you? Hang it all, you can't leave me alone in a scrape 
like this." 
"I shall go home by the tunnel," said Polly rather coldly. "That'll be the quickest way. And if you 
want me to come back, hadn't you better say you're sorry?" 
"Sorry?" exclaimed Digory. "Well now, if that isn't just like a girl! What have I done?" 
"Oh nothing of course," said Polly sarcastically. "Only nearly screwed my wrist off in that room 
with all the waxworks, like a cowardly bully. Only struck the bell with the hammer, like a silly idiot. Only 
turned back in the wood so that she had time to catch hold of you before we jumped into our own pool. 
That's all." 

"Oh," said Digory, very surprised. "Well, alright, I'll say I'm sorry. And I really am sorry about 
what happened in the waxworks room. There: I've said I'm sorry. And now, do be decent and come back. I 
shall be in a frightful hole if you don't." 
"I don't see what's going to happen to you. It's Mr Ketterley who's going to sit on red hot chairs 
and have ice in his bed, isn't it?" 
"It isn't that sort of thing," said Digory. "What I'm bothered about is Mother. Suppose that 
creature went into her room. She might frighten her to death." 
"Oh, I see," said Polly in rather a different voice. "Alright. We'll call it Pax. I'll come back - if I 
can. But I must go now." And she crawled through the little door into the tunnel; and that dark place 
among the rafters which had seemed so exciting and adventurous a few hours ago, seemed quite tame and 
homely now. 
We must now go back to Uncle Andrew. His poor old heart went pit-a-pat as he staggered down 
the attic stairs and he kept on dabbing at his forehead with a handkerchief. When he reached his bedroom, 
which was the floor below, he locked himself in. And the very first thing he did was to grope in his 
wardrobe for a bottle and a wine-glass which he always kept hidden there where Aunt Letty could not find 
them. He poured himself out a glassful of some nasty, grown-up drink and drank it off at one gulp. Then 
he drew a deep breath. 
"Upon my word," he said to himself. "I'm dreadfully shaken. Most upsetting! And at my time of 
life!" 
He poured out a second glass and drank it too; then he began to change his clothes. You have 
never seen such clothes, but I can remember them. He put on a very high, shiny, stiff collar of the sort that 
made you hold your chin up all the time. He put on a white waistcoat with a pattern on it and arranged his 
gold watch chain across the front. He put on his best frock-coat, the one he kept for weddings and 
funerals. He got out his best tall hat and polished it up. There was a vase of flowers (put there by Aunt 
Letty) on his dressing table; he took one and put it in his buttonhole. He took a clean handkerchief (a 
lovely one such as you couldn't buy today) out of the little lefthand drawer and put a few drops of scent on 
it. He took his eye-glass, with the thick black ribbon, and screwed it into his eye; then he looked at 
himself in the mirror. 
Children have one kind of silliness, as you know, and grown-ups have another kind. At this 

moment Uncle Andrew was beginning to be silly in a very grown-up way. Now that the Witch was no 
longer in the same room with him he was quickly forgetting how she had frightened him and thinking 
more and more of her wonderful beauty. He kept on saying to himself, "A dem fine woman, sir, a dem 
fine woman. A superb creature." He had also somehow managed to forget that it was the children who 
had got hold of this "superb creature": he felt as if he himself by his Magic had called her out of unknown 
worlds. 
"Andrew, my boy," he said to himself as he looked in the glass, "you're a devilish well preserved 
fellow for your age. A distinguished-looking man, sir." 
You see, the foolish old man was actually beginning to imagine the Witch would fall in love with 
him. The two drinks probably had something to do with it, and so had his best clothes. But he was, in any 
case, as vain as a peacock; that was why he had become a Magician. 
He unlocked' the door, went downstairs, sent the housemaid out to fetch a hansom (everyone had 
lots of servants in those days) and looked into the drawingroom. There, as he expected, he found Aunt 
Letty. She was busily mending a mattress. It lay on the floor near the window and she was kneeling on it. 
"Ah, Letitia my dear," said Uncle Andrew, "I - ah have to go out. Just lend me five pounds or so, 
there's a good gel." ("Gel" was the way he pronounced girl.) 
"No, Andrew dear," said Aunty Letty in her firm, quiet voice, without looking up from her work. 
"I've told you times without number that I will not lend you money." 
"Now pray don't be troublesome, my dear gel," said Uncle Andrew. "It's most important. You will 
put me in a deucedly awkward position if you don't." 
"Andrew," said Aunt Letty, looking him straight in the face, "I wonder you are not ashamed to 
ask me for money." 
There was a long, dull story of a grown-up kind behind these words. All you need to know about 
it is that Uncle Andrew, what with "managing dear Letty's business matters for her", and never doing any 
work, and running up large bills for brandy and cigars (which Aunt Letty had paid again and again) had 
made her a good deal poorer than she had been thirty years ago. 

"My dear gel," said Uncle Andrew, "you don't understand. I shall have some quite unexpected 
expenses today. I have to do a little entertaining. Come now, don't be tiresome." 
"And who, pray, are you going to entertain, Andrew?" asked Aunt Letty. 
"A - a most distinguished visitor has just arrived." 
"Distinguished fiddlestick!" said Aunt Letty. "There hasn't been a ring at the hell for the last 
hour." 
At that moment the door was suddenly flung open. Aunt Letty looked round and saw with 
amazement that an enormous woman, splendidly dressed, with bare arms and flashing eyes, stood in the 
doorway. It was the Witch. 
"Now; slave, how long am I to wait for my chariot?" thundered the Witch. Uncle Andrew 
cowered away from her. Now that she was really present, all the silly thoughts he had had while looking 
at himself in the glass were oozing out of him. But Aunt Letty at once got up from her knees and came 
over to the centre of the room. 
"And who is this young person, Andrew, may I ask?" said Aunt Letty in icy tones. 
"Distinguished foreigner - v-very important p-person," he stammered. 

"Rubbish!" said Aunt Letty, and then, turning to the Witch, "Get out of my house this moment, 
you shameless hussy, or I'll send for the police." She thought the Witch must be someone out of a circus 
and she did not approve of bare arms. 
"What woman is this?" said Jadis. "Down on your knees, minion, before I blast you." 
"No strong language in this house if you please, young woman," said Aunt Letty. 
Instantly, as it seemed to Uncle Andrew, the Queen towered up to an even greater height. Fire 
flashed from her eyes: she flung out her arm with the same gesture and the same horrible-sounding words 
that had lately turned the palacegates of Charn to dust. But nothing happened except that Aunt Letty, 
thinking that those horrible words were meant to be ordinary English, said: 
"I thought as much. The woman is drunk. Drunk! She can't even speak clearly." 
It must have been a terrible moment for the Witch when she suddenly realised that her power of 
turning people into dust, which had been quite real in her own world, was not going to work in ours. But 
she did not lose her nerve even for a second. Without wasting a thought on her disappointment, she 
lunged forward, caught Aunt Letty round the neck and the knees, raised her high above her head as if she 
had been no heavier than a doll, and threw her across the room. While Aunt Letty was still hurtling 
through the air, the housemaid (who was having a beautifully exciting morning) put her head in at the 
door and said, "If you please, sir, the 'ansom's come." 
"Lead on, Slave," said the Witch to Uncle Andrew. He began muttering something about 
"regrettable violence must really protest", but at a single glance from Jadis he became speechless. She 
drove him out of the room and out of the house; and Digory came running down the stairs just in time to 
see the front door close behind them. 
"Jiminy!" he said. "She's loose in London. And with Uncle Andrew. I wonder what on earth is 
going to happen now." 
"Oh, Master Digory," said the housemaid (who was really having a wonderful day), "I think Miss 
Ketterley's hurt herself somehow." So they both rushed into the drawing-room to find out what had 

happened. 
If Aunt Letty had fallen on bare boards or even on the carpet, I suppose all her bones would have 
been broken: but by great good luck she had fallen on the mattress. Aunt Letty was a very tough old lady: 
aunts often were in those days. After she had had some sal volatile and sat still for a few minutes, she said 
there was nothing the matter with her except a few bruises. Very soon she was taking charge of the 
situation. 
"Sarah," she said to the housemaid (who had never had such a day before), "go around to the 
police station at once and tell them there is a dangerous lunatic at large. I will take Mrs Kirke's lunch up 
myself." Mrs Kirke was, of course, Digory's mother. 
When Mother's lunch had been seen to, Digory and Aunt Letty had their own. After that he did 
some hard thinking. 
The problem was how to get the Witch back to her own world, or at any rate out of ours, as soon 
as possible. Whatever happened, she must not be allowed to go rampaging about the house. Mother must 
not see her. 
And, if possible, she must not be allowed to go rampaging about London either. Digory had not 
been in the drawingroom when she tried to "blast" Aunt Letty, but he had seen her "blast" the gates at 
Charn: so he knew her terrible powers and did not know that she had lost any of them by coming into our 
world. And he knew she meant to conquer our world. At the present moment, as far as he could see, she 
might be blasting Buckingham Palace or the Houses of Parliament: and it was almost certain that quite a 
number of policemen had by now been reduced to little heaps of dust. And there didn't seem to be 
anything he could do about that. "But the rings seem to work like magnets," thought Digory. "If I can only 
touch her and then slip on my yellow, we shall both go into the Wood between the Worlds. I wonder will 
she go all faint again there? Was that something the place does to her, or was it only the shock of being 
pulled out of her own world? But I suppose I'll have to risk that. And how am I to find the beast? I don't 
suppose Aunt Letty would let me go out, not unless I said where I was going. And I haven't got more than 
twopence. I'd need any amount of money for buses and trams if I went looking all over London. Anyway, 
I haven't the faintest idea where to look. I wonder if Uncle Andrew is still with her." 
It seemed in the end that the only thing he could do was to wait and hope that Uncle Andrew and 
the Witch would come back. If they did, he must rush out and get hold of the Witch and put on his yellow 
Ring before she had a chance to get into the house. This meant that he must watch the front door like a cat 
watching a mouse's hole; he dared not leave his post for a moment. So he went into the dining-room and 
"glued his face" as they say, to the window. It was a bow-window from which you could see the steps up 

to the front door and see up and down the street, so that no one could reach the front door without your 
knowing. "I wonder what Polly's doing?" thought Digory. 
He wondered about this a good deal as the first slow half-hour ticked on. But you need not 
wonder, for I am going to tell you. She had got home late for her dinner, with her shoes and stockings 
very wet. And when they asked her where she had been and what on earth she had been doing, she said 
she had been out with Digory Kirke. Under further questioning she said she had got her feet wet in a pool 
of water, and that the pool was in a wood. Asked where the wood was, she said she didn't know. Asked if 
it was in one of the parks, she said truthfully enough that she supposed it might be a sort of park. From all 
of this Polly's mother got the idea that Polly had gone off, without telling anyone, to some part of London 
she didn't know, and gone into a strange park and amused herself jumping into puddles. As a result she 
was told that she had been very naughty indeed and that she wouldn't be allowed to play with "that Kirke 
boy" any more if anything of the sort ever happened again. Then she was given dinner with all the nice 
parts left out and sent to bed for two solid hours. It was a thing that happened to one quite often in those 
days. 
So while Digory was staring out of the dining-room window, Polly was lying in bed, and both 
were thinking how terribly slowly the time could go. I think, myself, I would rather have been in Polly's 
position. She had only to wait for the end of her two hours: but every few minutes Digory would hear a 
cab or a baker's van or a butcher's boy coming round the corner and think "Here she comes", and then find 
it wasn't. And in between these false alarms, for what seemed hours and hours, the clock ticked on and 
one big fly - high up and far out of reach buzzed against the window. It was one of those houses that get 
very quiet and dull in the afternoon and always seem to smell of mutton. 
During his long watching and waiting one small thing happened which I shall have to mention 
because something important came of it later on. A lady called with some grapes for Digory's Mother; and 
as the dining-room door was open, Digory couldn't help overhearing Aunt Letty and the lady as they 
talked in the hall. 
"What lovely grapes!" came Aunt Letty's voice. "I'm sure if anything could do her good these 
would. But poor, dear little Mabel! I'm afraid it would need fruit from the land of youth to help her now. 
Nothing in this world will do much." Then they both lowered their voices and said a lot more that he 
could not hear. 
If he had heard that bit about the land of youth a few days ago he would have thought Aunt Letty 
was just talking without meaning anything in particular, the way grown-ups do, and it wouldn't have 
interested him. He almost thought so now. But suddenly it flashed upon his mind that he now knew (even 
if Aunt Letty didn't) that there really were other worlds and that he himself had been in one of them. At 
that rate there might be a real Land of Youth somewhere. There might be almost anything. There might be 
fruit in some other world that would really cure his mother! And oh, oh - Well, you know how it feels if 

you begin hoping for something that you want desperately badly; you almost fight against the hope 
because it is too good to be true; you've been disappointed so often before. That was how Digory felt. But 
it was no good trying to throttle this hope. It might really, really, it just might be true. So many odd things 
had happened already. And he had the magic rings. There must be worlds you could get to through every 
pool in the wood. He could hunt through them all. And then Mother well again. Everything right again. 
He forgot all about watching for the Witch. His hand was already going into the pocket where he kept the 
yellow ring, when all at once he herd a sound of galloping. 
"Hullo! What's that?" thought Digory. "Fire-engine? I wonder what house is on fire. Great Scott, 
it's coming here. Why, it's Her." 
I needn't tell you who he meant by Her. 
First came the hansom. There was no one in the driver's seat. On the roof - not sitting, but 
standing on the roof swaying with superb balance as it came at full speed round the corner with one wheel 
in the air - was Jadis the Queen of Queens and the Terror of Charn. Her teeth were bared, her eyes shone 
like fire, and her long hair streamed out behind her like a comet's tail. She was flogging the horse without 
mercy. Its nostrils were wide and red and its sides were spotted with foam. It galloped madly up to the 
front door, missing the lamp-post by an inch, and then reared up on its hind legs. The hansom crashed into 
the lamp-post and shattered into several pieces. The Witch, with a magnificent jump, had sprung clear just 
in time and landed on the horse's back. She settled herself astride and leaned forward, whispering things 
in its ear. They must have been things meant not to quiet it but to madden it. It was on its hind legs again 
in a moment, and its neigh was like a scream; it was all hoofs and teeth and eyes and tossing mane. Only a 
splendid rider could have stayed on its back. 
Before Digory had recovered his breath a good many other things began to happen. A second 
hansom dashed up close behind the first: out of it there jumped a fat man in a frock-coat and a policeman. 
Then came a third hansom with two more policemen in it. After it, came about twenty people (mostly 
errand boys) on bicycles, all ringing their bells and letting out cheers and cat-calls. Last of all came a 
crowd of people on foot: all very hot with running, but obviously enjoying themselves. Windows shot up 
in all the houses of that street and a housemaid or a butler appeared at every front door. They wanted to 
see the fun. 
Meanwhile an old gentleman had begun to struggle shakily out of the ruins of the first hansom. 
Several people rushed forward to help him; but as one pulled him one way and another another, perhaps 
he would have got out quite as quickly on his own. Digory guessed that the old gentleman must be Uncle 
Andrew but you couldn't see his face; his tall hat had been bashed down over it. 

Digory rushed out and joined the crowd. 
"That's the woman, that's the woman," cried the fat man, pointing at Jadis. "Do your duty, 
Constable. Hundreds and thousands of pounds' worth she's taken out of my shop. Look at that rope of 
pearls round her neck. That's mine. And she's given me a black eye too, what's more." 
"That she 'as, guv'nor," said one of the crowd. "And as lovely a black eye as I'd wish to see. 
Beautiful bit of work that must 'ave been. Gor! ain't she strong then!" 
"You ought to put a nice raw beefsteak on it, Mister, that's what it wants," said a butcher's boy. 
"Now then," said the most important of the policemen, "what's all this 'ere?" 
"I tell you she -" began the fat man, when someone else called out: 
"Don't let the old cove in the cab get away. 'E put 'er up to it." 
The old gentleman, who was certainly Uncle Andrew, had just succeeded in standing up and was 
rubbing his bruises. "Now then," said the policeman, turning to him, "What's all this?" 
"Womfle - pomfy - shomf," came Uncle Andrew's voice from inside the hat. 
"None of that now," said the policeman sternly. "You'll find this is no laughing matter. Take that 
'at off, see?" 
This was more easily said than done. But after Uncle Andrew had struggled in vain with the hat 
for some time, two other policemen seized it by the brim and forced it off. 

"Thank you, thank you," said Uncle Andrew in a faint voice. "Thank you. Dear me, I'm terribly 
shaken. If someone could give me a small glass of brandy -" 
"Now you attend to me, if you please," said the policeman, taking out a very large note book and 
a very small pencil. "Are you in charge of that there young woman?" 
"Look out!" called several voices, and the policeman jumped a step backwards just in time. The 
horse had aimed a kick at him which would probably have killed him. Then the Witch wheeled the horse 
round so that she faced the crowd and its hind-legs were on the footpath. She had a long, bright knife in 
her hand and had been busily cutting the horse free from the wreck of the hansom. 
All this time Digory had been trying to get into a position from which he could touch the Witch. 
This wasn't at all easy because, on the side nearest to him, there were too many people. And in order to 
get round to the other side he had to pass between the horse's hoofs and the railings of the "area" that 
surrounded the house; for the Ketterleys' house had a basement. If you know anything about horses, and 
especially if you had seen what a state that horse was in at the moment, you will realize that this was a 
ticklish thing to do. Digory knew lots about horses, but he set his teeth and got ready to make a dash for it 
as soon as he saw a favourable moment. 
A red-faced man in a bowler hat had now shouldered his way to the front of the crowd. 
"Hi! P'leeceman," he said, "that's my 'orse what she's sitting on, same as it's my cab what she's 
made matchwood of." 
"One at a time, please, one at a time," said the policeman. 
"But there ain't no time," said the Cabby. "I know that 'orse better'n you do. 'Tain't an ordinary 
'orse. 'Is father was a hofficer's charger in the cavalry, 'e was. And if the young woman goes on hexcitin' 
'im, there'll be murder done. 'Ere, let me get at him." 
The policeman was only to glad to have a good reason for standing further away from the horse. 
The Cabby took a step nearer, looked up at Jadis, and said in a not unkindly voice: 

"Now, Missie, let me get at 'is 'ead, and just you get off. You're a Lidy, and you don't want all 
these roughs going for you, do you? You want to go 'ome and 'ave a nice cup of tea and a lay down quiet 
like; then you'll feel ever so much better." At the same time he stretched out his hand towards the horse's 
head with the words, "Steady, Strawberry, old boy. Steady now." 
Then for the first time the Witch spoke. 
"Dog!" came her cold, clear voice, ringing loud above all the other noises. "Dog, unhand our 
royal charger. We are the Empress Jadis." 
"Ho! Her-ipress, are you? We'll see about that," said a voice. Then another voice said, "Three 
cheers for the Hempress of Colney 'Atch" and quite a number joined in. A flush of colour came into the 
Witch's face and she bowed ever so slightly. But the cheers died away into roars of laughter and she saw 
that they had only been making fun of her: A change came over her expression and she changed the knife 
to her left hand. Then, without warning, she did a thing that was dreadful to see. Lightly, easily, as if it 
were the most ordinary thing in the world, she stretched up her right arm and wrenched off one of the 
cross-bars of the lamp-post. If she had lost some magical powers in our world, she had not lost her 
strength; she could break an iron bar as if it were a stick of barleysugar. She tossed her new weapon up in 
the air, caught it again, brandished it, and urged the horse forward. 
"Now's my chance," thought Digory. He darted between the horse and the railings and began 
going forward. If only the brute would stay still for a moment he might catch the Witch's heel. As he 
rushed, he heard a sickening crash and a thud. The Witch had brought the bar down on the chief 
policeman's helmet: the man fell like a nine-pin. 
"Quick, Digory. This must be stopped," said a voice beside him. It was Polly, who had rushed 
down the moment she was allowed out of bed. 

"You are a brick," said Digory. "Hold on to me tight. You'd have to manage the ring. Yellow, 
remember. And don't put it on till I shout." 
There was a second crash and another policeman crumpled up. There came an angry roar from the 
crowd: "Pull her down. Get a few paving-stones. Call out the Military." But most of them were getting as 
far away as they could. The Cabby, however, obviously the bravest as well as the kindest person present, 
was keeping close to the horse, dodging this way and that to avoid the bar, but still trying to catch 
Strawberry's head. 
The crowd booed and bellowed again. A stone whistled over Digory's head. Then came the voice 
of the Witch, clear like a great bell, and sounding as if, for once, she were almost happy. 
"Scum! You shall pay dearly for this when I have conquered your world. Not one stone of your 
city will be left. I will make it as Charn, as Felinda, as Sorlois, as Bramandin." 
Digory as last caught her ankle. She kicked back with her heel and hit him in the mouth. In his 
pain he lost hold. His lip was cut and his mouth full of blood. From somewhere very close by came the 
voice of Uncle Andrew in a sort of trembling scream. "Madam - my dear young lady - for heaven's sake - 
compose yourself." Digory made a second grab at her heel, and was again shaken off. More men were 
knocked down by the iron bar. He made a third grab: caught the heel: held on tike grim death, shouting to 
Polly "Go!" then Oh, thank goodness. The angry, frightened faces had vanished. The angry, frightened 
voices were silenced. All except Uncle Andrew's. Close beside Digory in the darkness, it was wailing on 
"Oh, oh, is this delirium? Is it the end? I can't bear it. It's not fair. I never meant to be a Magician. It's all a 
misunderstanding. It's all my godmother's fault; I must protest against this. 
In my state of health too. A very old Dorsetshire family." 
"Bother!" thought Digory. "We didn't want to bring him along. My hat, what a picnic. Are you 
there, Polly?" 
"Yes, I'm here. Don't keep on shoving." 
"I'm not," began Digory, but before he could say anything more, their heads came out into the 
warm, green sunshine of the wood. And as they stepped out of the pool Polly cried out: 

"Oh look! We've-brought the old horse with us too. And Mr Ketterley. And the Cabby. This is a 
pretty kettle of fish!" 
As soon as the Witch saw that she was once more in the wood she turned pale and bent down till 
her face touched the mane of the horse. You could see she felt deadly sick. Uncle Andrew was shivering. 
But Strawberry, the horse, shook his head, gave a cheerful whinny, and seemed to feel better. He became 
quiet for the first time since Digory had seen him. His ears, which had been laid flat back on his skull, 
came into their proper position, and the fire went out of his eyes. 
"That's right, old boy," said the Cabby, slapping Strawberry's neck. "That's better. Take it easy." 
Strawberry did the most natural thing in the world. Being very thirsty (and no wonder) he walked 
slowly across to the nearest pool and stepped into it to have a drink. Digory was still holding the Witch's 
heel and Polly was holding Digory's hand. One of the Cabby's hands was on Strawberry; and Uncle 
Andrew, still very shaky, had just grabbed on the Cabby's other hand. 
"Quick," said Polly, with a look at Digory. "Greens!" 
So the horse never got his drink. Instead, the whole party found themselves sinking into darkness. 
Strawberry neighed; Uncle Andrew whimpered. Digory said, "That was a bit of luck." 
There was a short pause. Then Polly said, "Oughtn't we to be nearly there now?" 
"We do seem to be somewhere," said Digory. "At least I'm standing on something solid." 
"Why, so am I, now that I come to think of it," said Polly. "But why's it so dark? I say, do you 
think we got into the wrong Pool?" 
"Perhaps this is Charn," said Digory. "Only we've got back in the middle of the night." 

"This is not Charn," came the Witch's voice. "This is an empty world. This is Nothing." 
And really it was uncommonly like Nothing. There were no stars. It was so dark that they couldn't 
see one another at all and it made no difference whether you kept your eyes shut or open. Under their feet 
there was a cool, flat something which might have been earth, and was certainly not grass or wood. The 
air was cold and dry and there was no wind. 
"My doom has come upon me," said the Witch in a voice of horrible calmness. 
"Oh don't say that," babbled Uncle Andrew. "My dear young lady, pray don't say such things. It 
can't be as bad as that. Ah - Cabman - my good man - you don't happen to have a flask about you? A drop 
of spirits is just what I need." 
"Now then, now then," came the Cabby's voice, a good firm, hardy voice. "Keep cool everyone, 
that's what I say. No bones broken, anyone? Good. Well there's something to be thankful for straight 
away, and more than anyone could expect after falling all that way. Now, if we've fallen down some 
diggings - as it might be for a new station on the Underground - someone will come and get us out 
presently, see! And if we're dead - which I don't deny it might be - well, you got to -remember that worse 
things 'appen at sea and a chap's got to die sometime. And there ain't nothing to be afraid of if a chap's led 
a decent life. And if you ask me, I think the best thing we could do to pass the time would be sing a 
'ymn." 
And he did. He struck up at once a harvest thanksgiving hymn, all about crops being "safely 
gathered in". It was not very suitable to a place which felt as if nothing had ever grown there since the 
beginning of time, but it was the one he could remember best. He had a fine voice and the children joined 
in; it was very cheering. Uncle Andrew and the Witch did not join in. 
Towards the end of the hymn Digory felt someone plucking at his elbow and from a general smell 
of brandy and cigars and good clothes he decided that it must be Uncle Andrew. Uncle Andrew was 
cautiously pulling him away from the others. When they had gone a little distance, the old man put his 
mouth so close to Digory's ear that it tickled, and whispered: 
"Now, my boy. Slip on your ring. Let's be off." 

But the Witch had very good ears. "Fool!" came her voice and she leaped off the horse. "Have 
you forgotten that I can hear men's thoughts? Let go the boy. If you attempt treachery I will take such 
vengeance upon you as never was heard of in all worlds from the beginning." 
"And," added Digory, "if you think I'm such a mean pig as to go off and leave Polly - and the 
Cabby - and the horse in a place like this, you're well mistaken." 
"You are a very naughty and impertinent little boy," said Uncle Andrew. 
"Hush!" said the Cabby. They all listened. 
In the darkness something was happening at last. A voice had begun to sing. It was very far away 
and Digory found it hard to decide from what direction it was coming. Sometimes it seemed to come from 
all directions at once. Sometimes he almost thought it was coming out of the earth beneath them. Its lower 
notes were deep enough to be the voice of the earth herself. There were no words. There was hardly even 
a tune. But it was, beyond comparison, the most beautiful noise he had ever heard. It was so beautiful he 
could hardly bear it. The horse seemed to like it too; he gave the sort of whinney a horse would give if, 
after years of being a cab-horse, it found itself back in the old field where it had played as a foal, and saw 
someone whom it remembered and loved coming across the field to bring it a lump of sugar. 
"Gawd!" said the Cabby. "Ain't it lovely?" 
Then two wonders happened at the same moment. One was that the voice was suddenly joined by 
other voices; more voices than you could possibly count. They were in harmony with it, but far higher up 
the scale: cold, tingling, silvery voices. The second wonder was that the blackness overhead, all at once, 
was blazing with stars. They didn't come out gently one by one, as they do on a summer evening. One 
moment there had been nothing but darkness; next moment a thousand, thousand points of light leaped 
out - single stars, constellations, and planets, brighter and bigger than any in our world. There were no 
clouds. The new stars and the new voices began at exactly the same time. If you had seen and heard it, as 
Digory did, you would have felt quite certain that it was the stars themselves which were singing, and that 
it was the First Voice, the deep one, which had made them appear and made them sing. 
"Glory be!" said the Cabby. "I'd ha' been a better man all my life if I'd known there were things 

like this." 
The Voice on the earth was now louder and more triumphant; but the voices in the sky, after 
singing loudly with it for a time, began to get fainter. And now something else was happening. 
Far away, and down near the horizon, the sky began to turn grey. A light wind, very fresh, began 
to stir. The sky, in that one place, grew slowly and steadily paler. You could see shapes of hills standing 
up dark against it. All the time the Voice went on singing. 
There was soon light enough for them to see one another's faces. The Cabby and the two children 
had open mouths and shining eyes; they were drinking in the sound, and they looked as if it reminded 
them of something. Uncle Andrew's mouth was open too, but not open with joy. He looked more as if his 
chin had simply dropped away from the rest of his face. His shoulders were stopped and his knees shook. 
He was not liking the Voice. If he could have got away from it by creeping into a rat's hole, he would 
have done so. But the Witch looked as if, in a way, she understood the music better than any of them. Her 
mouth was shut, her lips were pressed together, and her fists were clenched. Ever since the song began 
she had felt that this whole world was filled with a Magic different from hers and stronger. She hated it. 
She would have smashed that whole world, or all worlds, to pieces, if it would only stop the singing. The 
horse stood with its ears well forward, and twitching. Every now and then it snorted and stamped the 
ground. It no longer looked like a tired old cab-horse; you could now well believe that its father had been 
in battles. 
The eastern sky changed from white to pink and from pink to gold. The Voice rose and rose, till 
all the air was shaking with it. And just as it swelled to the mightiest and most glorious sound it had yet 
produced, the sun arose. 
Digory had never seen such a sun. The sun above the ruins of Charn had looked older than ours: 
this looked younger. You could imagine that it laughed for joy as it came up. And as its beams shot across 
the land the travellers could see for the first time what sort of place they were in. It was a valley through 
which a broad, swift river wound its way, flowing eastward towards the sun. Southward there were 
mountains, northward there were lower hills. But it was a valley of mere earth, rock and water; there was 
not a tree, not a bush, not a blade of grass to be seen. The earth was of many colours: they were fresh, hot 
and vivid. They made you feel excited; until you saw the Singer himself, and then you forgot everything 
else. 
It was a Lion. Huge, shaggy, and bright, it stood facing the risen sun. Its mouth was wide open in 
song and it was about three hundred yards away. 

"This is a terrible world," said the Witch. "We must fly at once. Prepare the Magic." 
"I quite agree with you, Madam," said Uncle Andrew. "A most disagreeable place. Completely 
uncivilised. If only I were a younger man and had a gun -" 
"Garn!" said the Cabby. "You don't think you could shoot 'im, do you?" 
"And who would" said Polly. 
"Prepare the Magic, old fool," said Jadis. 
"Certainly, Madam," said Uncle Andrew cunningly. "I must have both the children touching me. 
Put on your homeward ring at once, Digory." He wanted to get away without the Witch. 
"Oh, it's rings, is it?" cried Jadis. She would have had her hands in Digory's pocket before you 
could say knife, but Digory grabbed Polly and shouted out: 
"Take care. If either of you come half an inch nearer, we two will vanish and you'll be left here 
for good. Yes: I have a ring in my pocket that will take Polly and me home. And look! My hand is just 
ready. So keep your distance. I'm sorry about you (he looked at the Cabby) and about the horse, but I can't 
help that. As for you two (he looked at Uncle Andrew and the Queen), you're both magicians, so you 
ought to enjoy living together." 
"'Old your noise, everyone," said the Cabby. "I want to listen to the moosic." 
For the song had now changed. 

THE Lion was pacing to and fro about that empty land and singing his new song. It was softer 
and more lilting than the song by which he had called up the stars and the sun; a gentle, rippling music. 
And as he walked and sang the valley grew green with grass. It spread out from the Lion like a pool. It ran 
up the sides of the little hills like a wave. In a few minutes it was creeping up the lower slopes of the 
distant mountains, making that young world every moment softer. The light wind could now be heard 
ruffling the grass. Soon there were other things besides grass. The higher slopes grew dark with heather. 
Patches of rougher and more bristling green appeared in the valley. Digory did not know what they were 
until one began coming up quite close to him. It was a little, spiky thing that threw out dozens of arms and 
covered these arms with green and grew larger at the rate of about an inch every two seconds. There were 
dozens of these things all round him now. When they were nearly as tall as himself he saw what they 
were. "Trees!" he exclaimed. 
The nuisance of it, as Polly said afterwards, was that you weren't left in peace to watch it all. Just 
as Digory said "Trees!" he had to jump because Uncle Andrew had sidled up to him again and was going 
to pick his pocket. It wouldn't have done Uncle Andrew much good if he had succeeded, for he was 
aiming at the right-hand pocket because he still thought the green rings were "homeward" rings. But of 
course Digory didn't want to lose either. 
"Stop!" cried the Witch. "Stand back. No, further back. If anyone goes within ten paces of either 
of the children, I will knock out his brains." She was poising in her hand the iron bar that she had torn off 
the lamp-post, ready to throw it. Somehow no one doubted that she would be a very good shot. 
"So!" -she said. "You would steal back to your own world with the boy and leave me here." 
Uncle Andrew's temper at last got the better of his fears. "Yes, Ma'am, I would," he said. "Most 
undoubtedly I would. I should be perfectly in my rights. I have been most shamefully, most abominably 
treated. I have done my best to show you such civilities as were in my power. And what has been my 
reward? You have robbed - I must repeat the word robbed a highly respectable jeweller. You have insisted 
on my entertaining you to an exceedingly expensive, not to say ostentatious, lunch, though I was obliged 
to pawn my watch and chain in order to do so (and let me tell you, Ma'am, that none of our family have 
been in the habit of frequenting pawnshops, except my cousin Edward, and he was in the Yeomanry). 
During that indigestible meal - I'm feeling the worse for it at this very moment - your behaviour and 
conversation attracted the unfavourable attention of everyone present. I feel I have been publicly 
disgraced. I shall never be able to show my face in that restaurant again. You have assaulted the police. 

You have stolen -" 
"Oh stow it, Guv'nor, do stow it," said the Cabby. "Watchin' and listenin's the thing at present; not 
talking." 
There was certainly plenty to watch and to listen to. The tree which Digory had noticed was now 
a full-grown beech whose branches swayed gently above his head. They stood on cool, green grass, 
sprinkled with daisies and buttercups. A little way off, along the river bank, willows were growing. On 
the other side tangles of flowering currant, lilac, wild rose, and rhododendron closed them in. The horse 
was tearing up delicious mouthfuls of new grass. 
All this time the Lion's song, and his stately prowl, to and fro, backwards and forwards, was 
going on. What was rather alarming was that at each turn he came a little nearer. Polly was finding the 
song more and more interesting because she thought she was beginning to see the connection between the 
music and the things that were happening. When a line of dark firs sprang up on a ridge about a hundred 
yards away she felt that they were connected with a series of deep, prolonged notes which the Lion had 
sung a second before. And when he burst into a rapid series of lighter notes she was not surprised to see 
primroses suddenly appearing in every direction. Thus, with an unspeakable thrill, she felt quite certain 
that all the things were coming (as she said) "out of the Lion's head". When you listened to his song you 
heard the things he was making up: when you looked round you, you saw them. This was so exciting that 
she had no time to be afraid. But Digory and the Cabby could not help feeling a bit nervous as each turn 
of the Lion's walk brought him nearer. As for Uncle Andrew, his teeth were chattering, but his knees were 
shaking so that he could not run away. 
Suddenly the Witch stepped boldly out towards the Lion. It was coming on, always singing, with 
a slow, heavy pace. It was only twelve yards away. She raised her arm and flung the iron bar straight at its 
head. 
Nobody, least of all Jadis, could have missed at that range. The bar struck the Lion fair between 
the eyes. It glanced off and fell with a thud in the grass. The Lion came on. Its walk was neither slower 
nor faster than before; you could not tell whether it even knew it had been hit. Though its soft pads made 
no noise, you could feel the earth shake beneath their weight. 
The Witch shrieked and ran: in a few moments she was out of sight among the trees. Uncle 
Andrew turned to do likewise, tripped over a root, and fell flat on his face in a little brook that ran down 
to join the river. The children could not move. They were not even quite sure that they wanted to. The 
Lion paid no attention to them. Its huge red mouth was open, but open in song not in a snarl. It passed by 
them so close that they could have touched its mane. They were terribly afraid it would turn and look at 

them, yet in some queer way they wished it would. But for all the notice it took of them they might just as 
well have been invisible and unsmellable. When it had passed them and gone a few paces further it 
turned, passed them again, and continued its march eastward. 
Uncle Andrew, coughing and spluttering, picked himself up. 
"Now, Digory," he said, "we've got rid of that woman, and the brute of a lion is gone. Give me 
your hand and put on your ring at once." 
"Keep off," said Digory, backing away from him. "Keep clear of him, Polly. Come over here 
beside me. Now I warn you, Uncle Andrew, don't come one step nearer, we'll just vanish." 
"Do what you're told this minute, sir," said Uncle Andrew. "You're an extremely disobedient, illbehaved 
little boy." 
"No fear," said Digory. "We want to stay and see what happens. I thought you wanted to know 
about other worlds. Don't you like it now you're here?" 
"Like it!" exclaimed Uncle Andrew. "Just look at the state I'm in. And it was my best coat and 
waistcoat, too." He certainly was a dreadful sight by now: for of course, the more dressed up you were to 
begin with, the worse you look after you've crawled out of a smashed hansoncab and fallen into a muddy 
brook. "I'm not saying," he added, "that this is not a most interesting place. If I were a younger man, now 
- perhaps I could get some lively young fellow to come here first. One of those big-game hunters. 
Something might be made of this country. The climate is delightful. I never felt such air. I believe it 
would have done me good if - if circumstances had been more favourable. If only we'd had a gun." 
"Guns be blowed," said the Cabby. "I think I'll go and see if I can give Strawberry a rub down. 
That horse 'as more sense than some 'umans as I could mention." He walked back to Strawberry and 
began making the hissing noises that grooms make. 
"Do you still think that Lion could be killed by a gun?" asked Digory. "He didn't mind the iron 
bar much." 

"With all her faults," said Uncle Andrew, "that's a plucky gel, my boy. It was a spirited thing to 
do." He rubbed his hands and cracked his knuckles, as if he were once more forgetting how the Witch 
frightened him whenever she was really there. 
"It was a wicked thing to do," said Polly. "What harm had he done her?" 
"Hullo! What's that?" said Digory. He had darted forward to examine something only a few yards 
away. "I say, Polly," he called back. "Do come and look." 
Uncle Andrew came with her; not because he wanted to see but because he wanted to keep close 
to the children there might be a chance of stealing their rings. But when he saw what Digory was looking 
at, even he began to take an interest. It was a perfect little model of a lamp-post, about three feet high but 
lengthening, and thickening in proportion, as they watched it; in fact growing just as the trees had grown. 
"It's alive too - I mean, it's lit," said Digory. And so it was; though of course, the brightness of the 
sun made the little flame in the lantern hard to see unless your shadow fell on it. 
"Remarkable, most remarkable," muttered Uncle Andrew. "Even I never dreamt of Magic like 
this. We're in a world where everything, even a lamp-post, comes to life and grows. Now I wonder what 
sort of seed a lamppost grows from?" 
"Don't you see?" said Digory. "This is where the bar fell - the bar she tore off the lamp-post at 
home. It sank into the ground and now it's coming up as a young lamppost." (But not so very young now; 
it was as tall as Digory while he said this.) 
"That's it! Stupendous, stupendous," said Uncle Andrew, rubbing his hands harder than ever. "Ho, 
ho! They laughed at my Magic. That fool of a sister of mine thinks I'm a lunatic. I wonder what they'll say 
now? I have discovered a world where everything is bursting with life and growth. Columbus, now, they 
talk about Columbus. But what was America to this? The commercial possibilities of this country are 
unbounded. Bring a few old bits of scrap iron here, bury 'em, and up they come as brand new railway 
engines, battleships, anything you please. They'll cost nothing, and I can sell 'em at full prices in England. 
I shall be a millionaire. And then the climate! I feel years younger already. I can run it as a health resort. 
A good sanatorium here might be worth twenty thousand a year. Of course I shall have to let a few people 
into the secret. The first thing is to get that brute shot." 

"You're just like the Witch," said Polly. "All you think of is killing things." 
"And then as regards oneself," Uncle Andrew continued, in a happy dream. "There's no knowing 
how long I might live if I settled here. And that's a big consideration when a fellow has turned sixty. I 
shouldn't be surprised if I never grew a day older in this country! Stupendous! The land of youth!" 
"Oh!" cried Digory. "The land of youth! Do you think it really is?" For of course he remembered 
what Aunt Letty had said to the lady who brought the grapes, and that sweet hope rushed back upon him. 
"Uncle Andrew", he said, "do you think there's anything here that would cure Mother?" 
"What are you talking about?" said Uncle Andrew. "This isn't a chemist's shop. But as I was 
saying -" 
"You don't care twopence about her," said Digory savagely. "I thought you might; after all, she's 
your sister as well as my Mother. Well, no matter. I'm jolly well going to ask the Lion himself if he can 
help me." And he turned and walked briskly away. Polly waited for a moment and then went after him. 
"Here! Stop! Come back! The boy's gone mad," said Uncle Andrew. He followed the children at a 
cautious distance behind; for he didn't want to get too far away from the green rings or too near the Lion. 
In a few minutes Digory came to the edge of the wood and there he stopped. The Lion was 
singing still. But now the song had once more changed. It was more like what we should call a tune, but it 
was also far wilder. It made you want to run and jump and climb. It made you want to shout. It made you 
want to rush at other people and either hug them or fight them. It made Digory hot and red in the face. It 
had some effect on Uncle Andrew, for Digory could hear him saying, "A spirited gel, sir. It's a pity about 
her temper, but a dem fine woman all the same, a dem fine woman." But what the song did to the two 
humans was nothing compared with what it was doing to the country. 
Can you imagine a stretch of grassy land bubbling like water in a pot? For that is really the best 
description of what was happening. In all directions it was swelling into humps. They were of very 
different sizes, some no bigger than mole-hills, some as big as wheel-barrows, two the size of cottages. 
And the humps moved and swelled till they burst, and the crumbled earth poured out of them, and from 
each hump there came out an animal. The moles came out just as you might see a mole come out in 
England. The dogs came out, barking the moment their heads were free, and struggling as you've seen 

them do when they are getting through a narrow hole in a hedge. The stags were the queerest to watch, for 
of course the antlers came up a long time before the rest of them, so at first Digory thought they were 
trees. The frogs, who all came up near the river, went straight into it with a plop-plop and a loud croaking. 
The panthers, leopards and things of that sort, sat down at once to wash the loose earth off their hind 
quarters and then stood up against the trees to sharpen their front claws. Showers of birds came out of the 
trees. Butterflies fluttered. Bees got to work on the flowers as if they hadn't a second to lose. But the 
greatest moment of all was when the biggest hump broke like a small earthquake and out came the sloping 
back, the large, wise head, and the four baggy-trousered legs of an elephant. And now you could hardly 
hear the song of the Lion; there was so much cawing, cooing, crowing, braying, neighing, baying, 
barking, lowing, bleating, and trumpeting. 
But though Digory could no longer hear the Lion, he could see it. It was so big and so bright that 
he could not take his eyes off it. The other animals did not appear to be afraid of it. Indeed, at that very 
moment, Digory heard the sound of hoofs from behind; a second later the old cab-horse trotted past him 
and joined the other beasts. (The air had apparently suited him as well as it had suited Uncle Andrew. He 
no longer looked like the poor, old slave he had been in London; he was picking up his feet and holding 
his head erect.) And now, for the first time, the Lion was quite silent. He was going to and fro among the 
animals. And every now and then he would go up to two of them (always two at a time) and touch their 
noses with his. He would touch two beavers among all the beavers, two leopards among all the leopards, 
one stag and one deer among all the deer, and leave the rest. Some sorts of animal he passed over 
altogether. But the pairs which he had touched instantly left their own kinds and followed him. At last he 
stood still and all the creatures whom he had touched came and stood in a wide circle around him. The 
others whom he had not touched began to wander away. Their noises faded gradually into the distance. 
The chosen beasts who remained were now utterly silent, all with their eyes fixed intently upon the Lion. 
The cat-like ones gave an occasional twitch of the tail but otherwise all were still. For the first time that 
day there was complete silence, except for the noise of running water. Digory's heart beat wildly; he knew 
something very solemn was going to be done. He had not forgotten about his Mother; but he knew jolly 
well that, even for her, he couldn't interrupt a thing like this. 
The Lion, whose eyes never blinked, stared at the animals as hard as if he was going to burn them 
up with his mere stare. And gradually a change came over them. The smaller ones - the rabbits, moles and 
such-like grew a good deal larger. The very big ones - you noticed it most with the elephants - grew a 
little smaller. Many animals sat up on their hind legs. Most put their heads on one side as if they were 
trying very hard to understand. The Lion opened his mouth, but no sound came from it; he was breathing 
out, a long, warm breath; it seemed to sway all the beasts as the wind sways a line of trees. Far overhead 
from beyond the veil of blue sky which hid them the stars sang again; a pure, cold, difficult music. Then 
there came a swift flash like fire (but it burnt nobody) either from the sky or from the Lion itself, and 
every drop of blood tingled in the children's bodies, and the deepest, wildest voice they had ever heard 
was saying: 
"Narnia, Narnia, Narnia, awake. Love. Think. Speak. Be walking trees. Be talking beasts. Be 
divine waters." 

IT was of course the Lion's voice. The children had long felt sure that he could speak: yet it was a 
lovely and terrible shock when he did. 
Out of the trees wild people stepped forth, gods and goddesses of the wood; with them came 
Fauns and Satyrs and Dwarfs. Out of the river rose the river god with his Naiad daughters. And all these 
and all the beasts and birds in their different voices, low or high or thick or clear, replied: 
"Hail, Aslan. We hear and obey. We are awake. We love. We think. We speak. We know." 
"But please, we don't know very much yet," said a nosey and snorty kind of voice. And that really 
did make the children jump, for it was the cab-horse who had spoken. 
"Good old Strawberry," said Polly. "I am glad he was one of the ones picked out to be a Talking 
Beast." And the Cabby, who was now standing beside the children, said, "Strike me pink. I always did say 
that 'oss 'ad a lot of sense, though." 
"Creatures, I give you yourselves," said the strong, happy voice of Aslan. "I give to you forever 
this land of Narnia. I give you the woods, the fruits, the rivers. I give you the stars and I give you myself. 
The Dumb Beasts whom I have not chosen are yours also. Treat them gently and cherish them but do not 
go back to their ways lest you cease to be Talking Beasts. For out of them you were taken and into them 
you can return. Do not so." 
"No, Aslan, we won't, we won't," said everyone. But one perky jackdaw added in a loud voice, 
"No fear!" and everyone else had finished just before he said it so that his words came out quite clear in a 
dead silence; and perhaps you have found out how awful that can be - say, at a party. The Jackdaw 
became so embarrassed that it hid its head under its wings as if it was going to sleep. And all the other 
animals began making various queer noises which are their ways of laughing and which, of course, no one 
has ever heard in our world. They tried at first to repress it, but Aslan said: 

"Laugh and fear not, creatures. Now that you are no longer dumb and witless, you need not 
always be grave. For jokes as well as justice come in with speech." 
So they all let themselves go. And there was such merriment that the Jackdaw himself plucked up 
courage again and perched on the cab-horse's head, between its ears, clapping its wings, and said: 
"Aslan! Aslan! Have I made the first joke? Will everybody always be told how I made the first 
joke?" 
"No, little friend," said the Lion. "You have not made the first joke; you have only been the first 
joke." Then everyone laughed more than ever; but the Jackdaw didn't mind and laughed just as loud till 
the horse shook its head and the Jackdaw lost its balance and fell off, but remembered its wings (they 
were still new to it) before it reached the ground. 
"And now," said Aslan, "Narnia is established. We must next take thought for keeping it safe. I 
will call some of you to my council. Come hither to me, you the chief Dwarf, and you the River-god, and 
you Oak and the Owl, and both the Ravens and the Bull-Elephant. We must talk together. For though the 
world is not five hours old an evil has already entered it." 
The creatures he had named came forward and he turned away eastward with them. The others all 
began talking, saying things like "What did he say had entered the world? - A Neevil - What's a Neevil? - 
No, he didn't say a Neevil, he said a weevil - Well, what's that?" 
"Look here," said Digory to Polly, "I've got to go after him - Aslan, I mean, the Lion. I must 
speak to him." 
"Do you think we can?" said Polly. "I wouldn't dare." 
"I've got to," said Digory. "It's about Mother. If anyone could give me something that would do 
her good, it would be him." 

"I'll come along with you," said the Cabby. "I liked the looks of 'im. And I don't reckon these 
other beasts will go for us. And I want a word with old Strawberry." 
So all three of them stepped out boldly - or as boldly as they could - towards the assembly of 
animals. The creatures were so busy talking to one another and making friends that they didn't notice the 
three humans until they were very close; nor did they hear Uncle Andrew, who was standing trembling in 
his buttoned boots a good way off and shouting (but by no means at the top of his voice). 
"Digory! Come back! Come back at once when you're told. I forbid you to go a step further." 
When at last they were right in among the animals, the animals all stopped talking and stared at 
them. 
"Well?" said the He-Beaver at last, "what, in the name of Aslan, are these?" 
"Please," began Digory in rather a breathless voice, when a Rabbit said, "They're a kind of large 
lettuce, that's my belief." 
"No, we're not, honestly we're not," said Polly hastily. "We're not at all nice to eat." 
"There!" said the Mole. "They can talk. Who ever heard of a talking lettuce?" 
"Perhaps they're the Second joke," suggested the Jackdaw. 
A Panther, which had been washing its face, stopped for a moment to say, "Well, if they are, 
they're nothing like so good as the first one. At least, 1 don't see anything very funny about them." It 
yawned and went on with its wash. 

"Oh, please," said Digory. "I'm in such a hurry. I want to see the Lion." 
All this time the Cabby had been trying to catch Strawberry's eye. Now he did. "Now, Strawberry, 
old boy," he said. "You know me. You ain't going to stand there and say as you don't know me." 
"What's the Thing talking about, Horse?" said several voices. 
"Well," said Strawberry very slowly, "I don't exactly know, I think most of us don't know much 
about any 
thing yet. But I've a sort of idea I've seen a thing like this before. I've a feeling I lived somewhere 
else - or was something else - before Aslan woke us all up a few minutes ago. It's all very muddled. Like a 
dream. But there were things like these three in the dream." 
"What?" said the Cabby. "Not know me? Me what used to bring you a hot mash of an evening 
when you was out of sorts? Me what rubbed you down proper? Me what never forgot to put your cloth on 
you if you was standing in the _ cold? I wouldn't 'ave thought it of you, Strawberry." 
"It does begin to come back," said the Horse thoughtfully. "Yes. Let me think now, let me think. 
Yes, you used to tie a horrid black thing behind me and then hit me to make me run, and however far I ran 
this black thing would always be coming rattle-rattle behind me." 
"We 'ad our living to earn, see," said the Cabby. "Yours the same as mine. And if there 'adn't been 
no work and no whip there'd 'ave been no stable, no hay, no mash, and no oats. For you did get a taste of 
oats when I could afford 'em, which no one can deny." 
"Oats?" said the Horse, pricking up his ears. "Yes, I remember something about that. Yes, I 
remember more and more. You were always sitting up somewhere behind, and I was always running in 
front, pulling you and the black thing. I know I did all the work." 
"Summer, I grant you," said the Cabby. " 'Ot work for you and a cool seat for me. But what about 
winter, old boy, when you was keeping yourself warm and I was sitting up there with my feet like ice and 

my nose fair pinched off me with the wind, and my 'ands that numb I couldn't 'ardly 'old the reins?" 
"It was a hard, cruel country," said Strawberry. "There was no grass. All hard stones." 
"Too true, mate, too true!" said the Cabby. "A 'ard world it was. I always did say those pavingstones 
weren't fair on any 'oss. That's Lunn'on, that is. I didn't like it no more than what you did. You were 
a country 'oss, and I was a country man. Used to sing in the choir, I did, down at 'ome. But there wasn't a 
living for me there." 
"Oh please, please," said Digory. "Could we get on? The Lion's getting further and further away. 
And I do want to speak to him so dreadfully badly." 
"Look 'ere, Strawberry," said the Cabby. "This young gen'leman 'as something on his mind that he 
wants to talk to the Lion about; 'im you call Aslan. Suppose you was to let 'im ride on your back (which 
'e'd take it very kindly) and trot 'im over to where the Lion is. And me and the little girl will be following 
along." 
"Ride?" said Strawberry. "Oh, I remember now. That means sitting on my back. I remember there 
used to be a little one of you two-leggers who used to do that long ago. He used to have little hard, square 
lumps of some white stuff that he gave me. They tasted - oh, wonderful, sweeter than grass." 
"Ah, that'd be sugar," said the Cabby. 
"Please, Strawberry," begged Digory, "do, do let me get up and take me to Aslan." 
"Well, I don't mind," said the Horse. "Not for once in a way. Up you get." 
"Good old Strawberry," said the Cabby. "'Ere, young 'un, I'll give you a lift." Digory was soon on 
Strawberry's back, and quite comfortable, for he had ridden bare-back before on his own pony. 

"Now, do gee up, Strawberry," he said. 
"You don't happen to have a bit of that white stuff about you, I suppose?" said the Horse. 
"No. I'm afraid I haven't," said Digory. 
"Well, it can't be helped," said Strawberry, and off they went. 
At that moment a large Bulldog, who had been sniffing and staring very hard, said: 
"Look. Isn't there another of these queer creatures over there, beside the river, under the trees?" 
Then all the animals looked and saw Uncle Andrew, standing very still among the rhododendrons 
and hoping he wouldn't be noticed. 
"Come on!" said several voices. "Let's go and find out." So, while Strawberry was briskly trotting 
away with Digory in one direction (and Polly and the Cabby were following on foot) most of the creatures 
rushed towards Uncle Andrew with roars, barks, grunts, and various noises of cheerful interest. 
We must now go back a bit and explain what the whole scene had looked like from Uncle 
Andrew's point of view. It had not made at' all the same impression on him as on the Cabby and the 
children. For what you see and hear depends a good deal on where you are standing: it also depends on 
what sort of person you are. 
Ever since the animals had first appeared, Uncle Andrew had been shrinking further and further 
back into the thicket. He watched them very hard of course; but he wasn't really interested in seeing what 
they were doing, only in seeing whether they were going to make a rush at him. Like the Witch, he was 
dreadfully practical. He simply didn't notice that Aslan was choosing one pair out of every kind of beasts. 
All he saw, or thought he saw, was a lot of dangerous wild animals walking vaguely about. And he kept 
on wondering why the other animals didn't run away from the big Lion. 

When the great moment came and the Beasts spoke, he missed the whole point; for a rather 
interesting reason. When the Lion had first begun singing, long ago when it was still quite dark, he had 
realised that the noise was a song. And he had disliked the song very much. It made him think and feel 
things he did not want to think and feel. Then, when the sun rose and he saw that the singer was a lion 
("only a lion," as he said to himself) he tried his hardest to make believe that it wasn't singing and never 
had been singing - only roaring as any lion might in a zoo in our own world. "Of course it can't really 
have been singing," he thought, "I must have imagined it. I've been letting my nerves get out of order. 
Who ever heard of a lion singing?" And the longer and more beautiful the Lion sang, the harder Uncle 
Andrew tried to make himself believe that he could hear nothing but roaring. Now the trouble about trying 
to make yourself stupider than you really are is that you very often succeed. Uncle Andrew did. He soon 
did hear nothing but roaring in Aslan's song. Soon he couldn't have heard anything else even if he had 
wanted to. And when at last the Lion spoke and said, "Narnia awake," he didn't hear any words: he heard 
only a snarl. And when the Beasts spoke in answer, he heard only barkings, growlings, bayings, and 
howlings. And when they laughed - well, you can imagine. That was worse for Uncle Andrew than 
anything that had happened yet. Such a horrid, bloodthirsty din of hungry and angry brutes he had never 
heard in his life. Then, to his utter rage and horror, he saw the other three humans actually walking out 
into the open to meet the animals. 
"The fools!" he said to himself. "Now those brutes will eat the rings along with the children and 
I'll never be able to get home again. What a selfish little boy that Digory is! And the others are just as bad. 
If they want to throw away their own lives, that's their business. But what about me? They don't seem to 
think of that. No one thinks of me." 
Finally, when a whole crowd of animals came rushing towards him, he turned and ran for his life. 
And now anyone could see that the air of that young world was really doing the old gentleman good. In 
London he had been far too old to run: now, he ran at a speed which would have made him certain to win 
the hundred yards' race at any Prep school in England. His coattails flying out behind him were a fine 
sight. But of course it was no use. Many of the animals behind him were swift ones; it was the first run 
they had ever taken in their lives and they were all longing to use their new muscles. "After him! After 
him!" they shouted. "Perhaps he's that Neevil! Tally-ho! Tantivy! Cut him off! Round him up! Keep it up! 
Hurrah!" 
In a very few minutes some of them got ahead of him. They lined up in a row and barred his way. 
Others hemmed him in from behind. Wherever he looked he saw terrors. Antlers of great elks and the 
huge face of an elephant towered over him. Heavy, serious-minded bears and boars grunted behind him. 
Cool-looking leopards and panthers with sarcastic faces (as he thought) stared at him and waved their 
tails. What struck him most of all was the number of open mouths. The animals had really opened their 
mouths to pant; he thought they had opened their mouths to eat him. 
Uncle Andrew stood trembling and swaying this way and that. He had never liked animals at the 
best of times, being usually rather afraid of them; and of course years of doing cruel experiments on 

animals had made him hate and fear them far more. 
"Now, sir," said the Bulldog in his business-like way, "are you animal, vegetable, or mineral?" 
That was what it really said; but all Uncle Andrew heard was "Gr-r-rarrh-ow!" 
You may think the animals were very stupid not to see at once that Uncle Andrew was the same 
kind of creature as the two children and the Cabby. But you must remember that the animals knew 
nothing about clothes. They thought that Polly's frock and Digory's Norfolk suit and the Cabby's howlet 
hat were as much parts of them as their own fur and feathers. They wouldn't have known even that those 
three were all of the same kind if they hadn't spoken to them and if Strawberry had not seemed to think 
so. And Uncle Andrew was a great deal taller than the children and a good deal thinner than the Cabby. 
He was all in black except for his white waistcoat (not very white by now), and the great grey mop of his 
hair (now very wild indeed) didn't look to them like anything they had seen in the three other humans. So 
it was only natural that they should be puzzled. Worst of all, he didn't seem to be able to talk. 
He had tried to. When the Bulldog spoke to him (or, as he thought, first snarled and then growled 
at him) he held out his shaking hand and gasped "Good Doggie, then, poor old fellow." But the beasts 
could not understand him any more than he could understand them. They didn't hear any words: only a 
vague sizzling noise. Perhaps it was just as well they didn't, for no dog that I ever knew, least of all a 
Talking Dog of Narnia, likes being called a Good Doggie then; any more than you would like being called 
My Little Man. 
Then Uncle Andrew dropped down in a dead faint. 
"There!" said a Warthog, "it's only a tree. I always thought so." (Remember, they had never yet 
seen a faint or even a fall.) 

The Bulldog, who had been sniffing Uncle Andrew all over, raised its head and said, "It's an 
animal. Certainly an animal. And probably the same kind as those other ones." 
"I don't see that," said one of the Bears. "An animal wouldn't just roll over like that. We're 
animals and we don't roll over. We stand up. Like this." He rose to his hind legs, took a step backwards, 
tripped over a low branch and fell flat on his back. 
"The Third Joke, the Third Joke, the Third joke!" said the Jackdaw in great excitement. 
"I still think it's a sort of tree," said the Warthog. 
"If it's a tree," said the other Bear, "there might be a bees' nest in it." 
"I'm sure it's not a tree," said the Badger. "I had a sort of idea it was trying to speak before it 
toppled over." 
"That was only the wind in its branches," said the Warthog. 
"You surely don't mean," said the Jackdaw to the Badger, "that you think its a talking animal! It 
didn't say any words." 
"And yet, you know," said the Elephant (the She Elephant, of course; her husband, as you 
remember, had been called away by Aslan). "And yet, you know, it might be an animal of some kind. 
Mightn't the whitish lump at this end be a sort of face? And couldn't those holes be eyes and a mouth? No 
nose, of course. But then - ahem - one mustn't be narrow-minded. Very few of us have what could exactly 
be called a Nose." She squinted down the length of her own trunk with pardonable pride. 
"I object to that remark very strongly," said the Bulldog. 
"The Elephant is quite right," said the Tapir. 

"I tell you what!" said the Donkey brightly, "perhaps it's an animal that can't talk but thinks it 
can." 
"Can it be made to stand up?" said the Elephant thoughtfully. She took the limp form of Uncle 
Andrew gently in her trunk and set him up on end: upside down, unfortunately, so that two halfsovereigns, 
three halfcrowns, and a sixpence fell out of his pocket. But it was no use. Uncle Andrew 
merely collapsed again. 
"There!" said several voices. "It isn't an animal at all, It's not alive." 
"I tell you, it is an animal," said the Bulldog. "Smell it for yourself." 
"Smelling isn't everything," said the Elephant. 
"Why," said the Bulldog, "if a fellow can't trust his nose, what is he to trust?" 
"Well, his brains perhaps," she replied mildly. 
"I object to that remark very strongly," said the Bulldog. 
"Well, we must do something about it," said the Elephant. "Because it may be the Neevil, and it 
must be shown to Aslan. What do most of us think? Is it an animal or something of the tree kind?" 
"Tree! Tree!" said a dozen voices. 
"Very well," said the Elephant. "Then, if it's a tree it wants to be planted. We must dig a hole." 

The two Moles settled that part of the business pretty quickly. There was some dispute as to 
which way up Uncle Andrew ought to be put into the hole, and he had a very narrow escape from being 
put in head foremost. Several animals said his legs must be his branches and therefore the grey, fluffy 
thing (they meant his head) must be his root. But then others said that the forked end of him was the 
muddier and that it spread out more, as roots ought to do. So finally he was planted right way up. When 
they had patted down the earth it came up above his knees. 
"It looks dreadfully withered," said the Donkey. 
"Of course it wants some watering," said the Elephant. 
"I think I might say (meaning no offence to anyone present) that, perhaps, for that sort of work, 
my kind of nose -" 
"I object to that remark very strongly," said the Bulldog. But the Elephant walked quietly to the 
river, filled her trunk with water, and came back to attend to Uncle Andrew. The sagacious animal went 
on doing this till gallons of water had been squirted over him, and water was running out of the skirts of 
his frock-coat as if he had been for a bath with all his clothes on. In the end it revived him. He awoke 
from his faint. What a wake it was! But we must leave him to think over his wicked deed (if he was likely 
to do anything so sensible) and turn to more important things. 
Strawberry trotted on with Digory on his back till the noise of the other animals died away, and 
now the little group of Aslan and his chosen councillors was quite close. Digory knew that he couldn't 
possibly break in on so solemn a meeting, but there was no need to do so. At a word from Aslan, the He- 
Elephant, the Ravens, and all the rest of them drew aside. Digory slipped off the horse and found himself 
face to face with Aslan. And Aslan was bigger and more beautiful and more brightly golden and more 
terrible than he had thought. He dared not look into the great eyes. 
"Please - Mr Lion - Aslan - Sir," said Digory, "could you - may I - please, will you give me some 
magic fruit of this country to make Mother well?" 
He had been desperately hoping that the Lion would say "Yes"; he had been horribly afraid it 
might say "No". But he was taken aback when it did neither. 

"This is the Boy," said Aslan, looking, not at Digory, but at his councillors. "This is the Boy who 
did it." 
"Oh dear," thought Digory, "what have I done now?" 
"Son of Adam," said the Lion. "There is an evil Witch abroad in my new land of Narnia. Tell 
these good Beasts how she came here." 
A dozen different things that he might say flashed through Digory's mind, but he had the sense to 
say nothing except the exact truth. 
"I brought her, Aslan," he answered in a low voice. 
"For what purpose?" 
"I wanted to get her out of my own world back into her own. I thought I was taking her back to 
her own place." 
"How came she to be in your world, Son of Adam?" 
"By - by Magic." 
The Lion said nothing and Digory knew that he had not told enough. 
"It was my Uncle, Aslan," he said. "He sent us out of our own world by magic rings, at least I had 
to go because he sent Polly first, and then we met the Witch in a place called Charn and she just held on to 
us when -" 

"You met the Witch?" said Asian in a low voice which had the threat of a growl in it. 
"She woke up," said Digory wretchedly. And then, turning very white, "I mean, I woke her. 
Because I wanted to know what would happen if I struck a bell. Polly didn't want to. It wasn't her fault. I - 
I fought her. I know I shouldn't have. I think I was a bit enchanted by the writing under the bell." 
"Do you?" asked Asian; still speaking very low and deep. . 
"No," said Digory. "I see now I wasn't. I was only pretending." 
There was a long pause. And Digory was thinking all the time, "I've spoiled everything. There's 
no chance of getting anything for Mother now." 
When the Lion spoke again, it was not to Digory. 
"You see, friends," he said, "that before the new, clean world I gave you is seven hours old, a 
force of evil has already entered it; waked and brought hither by this son of Adam." The Beasts, even 
Strawberry, all turned their eyes on Digory till he felt that he wished the ground would swallow him up. 
"But do not be cast down," said Aslan, still speaking to the Beasts. "Evil will come of that evil, but it is 
still a long way off, and I will see to it that the worst falls upon myself. In the meantime, let us take such 
order that for many hundred years yet this shall be a merry land in a merry world. And as Adam's race has 
done the harm, Adam's race shall help to heal it. Draw near, you other two." 
The last words were spoken to Polly and the Cabby who had now arrived. Polly, all eyes and 
mouth, was staring at Aslan and holding the Cabby's hand rather tightly. The Cabby gave one glance at 
the Lion, and took off his bowler hat: no one had yet seen him without it. When it was off, he looked 
younger and nicer, and more like a countryman and less like a London cabman. 
"Son," said Aslan to the Cabby. "I have known you long. Do you know me?" 

"Well, no, sir," said the Cabby. "Leastways, not in an ordinary manner of speaking. Yet I feel 
somehow, if I may make so free, as 'ow we've met before." 
"It is well," said the Lion. "You know better than you think you know, and you shall live to know 
me better yet. How does this land please you?" 
"It's a fair treat, sir," said the Cabby. 
"Would you like to live here always?" 
"Well you see sir, I'm a married man," said the Cabby. "If my wife was here neither of us would 
ever want to go back to London, I reckon. We're both country folks really." 
Aslan threw up his shaggy head, opened his mouth, and uttered a long, single note; not very loud, 
but full of power. Polly's heart jumped in her body when she heard it. She felt sure that it was a call, and 
that anyone who heard that call would want to obey it and (what's more) would be able to obey it, 
however many worlds and ages lay between. And so, though she was filled with wonder, she was not 
really astonished or shocked when all of a sudden a young woman, with a kind, honest face stepped out of 
nowhere and stood beside her. Polly knew at once that it was the Cabby's wife, fetched out of our world 
not by any tiresome magic rings, but quickly, simply and sweetly as a bird flies to its nest. The young 
woman had apparently been in the middle of a washing day, for she wore an apron, her sleeves were 
rolled up to the elbow, and there were soapsuds on her hands. If she had had time to put on her good 
clothes (her best hat had imitation cherries on it) she would have looked dreadful; as it was, she looked 
rather nice. 
Of course she thought she was dreaming. That was why she didn't rush across to her husband and 
ask him what on earth had happened to them both. But when she looked at the Lion she didn't feel quite 
so sure it was a dream, yet for some reason she did not appear to be very frightened. Then she dropped a 
little half curtsey, as some country girls still knew how to do in those days. After that, she went and put 
her hand in the Cabby's and stood there looking round her a little shyly. 
"My children," said Aslan, fixing his eyes on both of them, "you are to be the first King and 
Queen of Narnia." 

The Cabby opened his mouth in astonishment, and his wife turned very red. 
"You shall rule and name all these creatures, and do justice among them, and protect them from 
their enemies when enemies arise. And enemies will arise, for there is an evil Witch in this world." 
The Cabby swallowed hard two or three times and cleared his throat. 
"Begging your pardon, sir," he said, "and thanking you very much I'm sure (which my Missus 
does the same) but I ain't no sort of a chap for a job like that. I never 'ad much eddycation, you see." 
"Well," said Aslan,"can you use a spade and a plough and raise food out of the earth?" 
"Yes, sir, I could do a bit of that sort of work: being brought up to it, like." 
"Can you rule these creatures kindly and fairly, remembering that they are not slaves like the 
dumb beasts of the world you were born in, but Talking Beasts and free subjects?" 
"I see that, sir," replied the Cabby. "I'd try to do the square thing by them all." 
"And would you bring up your children and grandchildren to do the same?" 
"It'd be up to me to try, sir. I'd do my best: wouldn't we, Nellie?" 
"And you wouldn't have favourites either among your own children or among the other creatures 
or let any hold another under or use it hardly?" 
"I never could abide such goings on, sir, and that's the truth. I'd give 'em what for if I caught 'em 
at it," said the Cabby. (All through this conversation his voice was growing slower and richer. More like 

the country voice he must have had as a boy and less like the sharp, quick voice of a cockney.) 
"And if enemies came against the land (for enemies will arise) and there was war, would you be 
the first in the charge and the last in the retreat?" 
"Well, sir," said the Cabby very slowly, "a chap don't exactly know till he's been tried. I dare say I 
might turn out ever such a soft 'un. Never did no fighting except with my fists. I'd try -that is, I 'ope I'd try 
- to do my bit." 
"Then," said Aslan,, "You will have done all that a King should do. Your coronation will be held 
presently. And you and your children and grandchildren shall be blessed, and some will be Kings of 
Narnia, and others will be Kings of Archenland which lies yonder over the Southern Mountains. And you, 
little Daughter (here he turned to Polly) are welcome. Have you forgiven the Boy for the violence he did 
you in the Hall of Images in the desolate palace of accursed Charn?" 
"Yes, Aslan, we've made it up," said Polly. 
"That is well," said Aslan. "And now for the Boy himself." 
DIGORY kept his mouth very tight shut. He had been growing more and more uncomfortable. He 
hoped that, whatever happened, he wouldn't blub or do anything ridiculous. 
"Son of Adam," said Aslan. "Are you ready to undo the wrong that you have done to my sweet 
country of Narnia on the very day of its birth?" 

"Well, I don't see what I can do," said Digory. "You see, the Queen ran away and -" 
"I asked, are you ready?" said the Lion. 
"Yes," said Digory. He had had for a second some wild idea of saying "I'll try to help you if you'll 
promise to help my Mother," but he realised in time that the Lion was not at all the sort of person one 
could try to make bargains with. But when he had said "Yes," he thought of his Mother, and he thought of 
the great hopes he had had, and how they were all dying away, and a lump came in his throat and tears in 
his eyes, and he blurted out: 
"But please, please - won't you - can't you give me something that will cure Mother?" Up till then 
he had been looking at the Lion's great feet and the huge claws on them; now, in his despair, he looked up 
at its face. What he saw surprised him as much as anything in his whole life. For the tawny face was bent 
down near his own and (wonder of wonders) great shining tears stood in the Lion's eyes. They were such 
big, bright tears compared with Digory's own that for a moment he felt as if the Lion must really be 
sorrier about his Mother than he was himself. 
"My son, my son," said Aslan. "I know. Grief is great. Only you and I in this land know that yet. 
Let us be good to one another. But I have to think of hundreds of years in the life of Narnia. The Witch 
whom you have brought into this world will come back to Narnia again. But it need not be yet. It is my 
wish to plant in Narnia a tree that she will not dare to approach, and that tree will protect Narnia from her 
for many years. So this land shall have a long, bright morning before any clouds come over the sun. You 
must get me the seed from which that tree is to grow." 
"Yes, sir," said Digory. He didn't know how it was to be done but he felt quite sure now that he 
would be able to do it. The Lion drew a deep breath, stooped its head even lower and gave him a Lion's 
kiss. And at once Digory felt that new strength and courage had gone into him. 
"Dear son," said Aslan, "I will tell you what you must do. Turn and look to the West and tell me 
what do you see?" 
"I see terribly big mountains, Aslan," said Digory, "I see this river coming down cliffs in a 
waterfall. And beyond the cliff there are high green hills with forests. And beyond those there are higher 
ranges that look almost black. And then, far away, there are big snowy mountains all heaped up together - 
like pictures of the Alps. And behind those there's nothing but the sky." 

"You see well," said the Lion. "Now the land of Narnia ends where the waterfall comes down, 
and once you have reached the top of the cliffs you will be out of Narnia and into the Western Wild. You 
must journey through those mountains till you find a green valley with a blue lake in it, walled round by 
mountains of ice. At the end of the lake there is a steep, green hill. On the top of that hill there is a garden. 
In the centre of that garden is a tree. Pluck an apple from that tree and bring it back to me." 
"Yes, sir," said Digory again. He hadn't the least idea of how he was to climb the cliff and find his 
way among all the mountains, but he didn't like to say that for fear it would sound like making excuses. 
But he did say, "I hope, Aslan, you're not in a hurry. I shan't be able to get there and back very quickly." 
"Little son of Adam, you shall have help," said Aslan. He then turned to the Horse who had been 
standing quietly beside them all this time, swishing his tail to keep the flies off, and listening with his 
head on one side as if the conversation were a little difficult to understand. 
"My dear," said Aslan to the Horse, "would you like to be a winged horse?" 
You should have seen how the Horse shook its mane and how its nostrils widened, and the little 
tap it gave the ground with one back hoof. Clearly it would very much like to be a winged horse. But it 
only said: 
"If you wish, Aslan - if you really mean - I don't know why it should be me - I'm not a very clever 
horse." 
"Be winged. Be the father of all flying horses," roared Aslan in a voice that shook the ground. 
"Your name is Fledge." 
The horse shied, just as it might have shied in the old, miserable days when it pulled a hansom. 
Then it roared. It strained its neck back as if there were a fly biting its shoulders and it wanted to scratch 
them. And then, just as the beasts had burst out of the earth, there burst out from the shoulders of Fledge 
wings that spread and grew, larger than eagles', larger than swans', larger than angels' wings in church 
windows. The feathers shone chestnut colour and copper colour. He gave a great sweep with them and 
leaped into the air. 

Twenty feet above Aslan and Digory he snorted, neighed, and curvetted. Then, after circling once 
round them, he dropped to the earth, all four hoofs together, looking awkward and surprised, but 
extremely pleased. 
"Is it good, Fledge?" said Aslan. 
"It is very good, Aslan," said Fledge. 
"Will you carry this little son of Adam on your back to the mountainvalley I spoke of?" 
"What? Now? At once?" said Strawberry - or Fledge, as we must now call him - "Hurrah! Come, 
little one, I've had things like you on my back before. 
Long, long ago. When there were green fields; and sugar." 
"What are the two daughters of Eve whispering about?" said Aslan, turning very suddenly on 
Polly and the Cabby's wife, who had in fact been making friends. 
"If you please, sir," said Queen Helen (for that is what Nellie the cabman's wife now was), "I 
think the little girl would love to go too, if it weren't no trouble." 
"What does Fledge say about that?" asked the Lion. 
"Oh, I don't mind two, not when they're little ones," said Fledge. "But I hope the Elephant doesn't 
want to come as well." 
The Elephant had no such wish, and the new King of Narnia helped both the children up: that is, 
he gave Digory a rough heave and set Polly as gently and daintily on the horse's back as if she were made 
of china and might break. "There they are, Strawberry - Fledge, I should say. This is a rum go." 

"Do not fly too high," said Aslan. "Do not try to go over the tops of the great ice-mountains. Look 
out for the valleys, the green places, and fly through them. There will always be a way through. And now, 
begone with my blessing." 
"Oh Fledge!" said Digory, leaning forward to pat the Horse's glossy neck. "This is fun. Hold on to 
me tight, Polly." 
Next moment the country dropped away beneath them, and whirled round as Fledge, like a huge 
pigeon, circled once or twice before setting off on his long westward flight. Looking down, Polly could 
hardly see the King and the Queen, and even Aslan himself was only a bright yellow spot on the green 
grass. Soon the wind was in their faces and Fledges wings settled down to a steady beat. 
All Narnia, many-coloured with lawns and rocks and heather and different sorts of trees, lay 
spread out below them, the river winding through it like a ribbon of quicksilver. They could already see 
over the tops of the low hills which lay northward on their right; beyond those hills a great moorland 
sloped gently up and up to the horizon. On their left the mountains were much higher, but every now and 
then there was a gap when you could see, between steep pine woods, a glimpse of the southern lands that 
lay beyond them, looking blue and far away. 
"That'll be where Archenland is," said Polly. 
"Yes, but look ahead!" said Digory. 
For now a great barrier of cliffs rose before them and they were almost dazzled by the sunlight 
dancing on the great waterfall by which the river roars and sparkles down into Narnia itself from the high 
western lands in which it rises. They were flying so high already that the thunder of those falls could only 
just be heard as a small, thin sound, but they were not yet high enough to fly over the top of the cliffs. 
"We'll have to do a bit of zig-zagging here," said Fledge. "Hold on tight." 
He began flying to and fro, getting higher at each turn. The air grew colder, and they heard the 

call of eagles far below them. 
"I say, look back! Look behind," said Polly. 
There they could see the whole valley of Narnia stretched out to where, just before the eastern 
horizon, there was a gleam of the sea. And now they were so high that they could see tiny-looking jagged 
mountains appearing beyond the northwest moors, and plains of what looked like sand far in the south. 
"I wish we had someone to tell us what all those places are," said Digory. 
"I don't suppose they're anywhere yet," said Polly. "I mean, there's no one there, and nothing 
happening. The world only began today." 
"No, but people will get there," said Digory. "And then they'll have histories, you know." 
"Well, it's a jolly good thing they haven't now," said Polly. "Because nobody can be made to learn 
it. Battles and dates and all that rot." 
Now they were over the top of the cliffs and in a few minutes the valley land of Narnia had sunk 
out of sight behind them. They were flying over a wild country of steep hills and dark forests, still 
following the course of the river. The really big mountains loomed ahead. But the sun was now in the 
travellers' eyes and they couldn't see things very clearly in that direction. For the sun sank lower and 
lower till the western sky was all like one great furnace full of melted gold; and it set at last behind a 
jagged peak which stood up against the brightness as sharp and flat as if it were cut out of cardboard. 
"It's none too warm up here," said Polly. 
"And my wings are beginning to ache," said Fledge. There's no sign of the valley with a Lake in 
it, like what Aslan said. What about coming down and looking out for a decent spot to spend the night in? 
We shan't reach that place tonight." 

"Yes, and surely it's about time for supper?" said Digory. 
So Fledge came lower and lower. As they came down nearer to the earth and among the hills, the 
air grew warmer and after travelling so many hours with nothing to listen to but the beat of Fledge's 
wings, it was nice to hear the homely and earthy noises again - the chatter of the river on its stony bed and 
the creaking of trees in the light wind. A warm, good smell of sun-baked earth and grass and flowers 
came up to them. At last Fledge alighted. Digory rolled off and helped Polly to dismount. Both were glad 
to stretch their stiff legs. 
The valley in which they had come down was in the heart of the mountains; snowy heights, one 
of them looking rosered in the reflections of the sunset, towered above them. 
"I am hungry," said Digory. 
"Well, tuck in," said Fledge, taking a big mouthful of grass. Then he raised his head, still chewing 
and with bits of grass sticking out on each side of his mouth like whiskers, and said, "Come on, you two. 
Don't be shy. There's plenty for us all." 
"But we can't eat grass," said Digory. 
"H'm, h'm," said Fledge, speaking with his mouth full. "Well - h'm - don't know quite what you'll 
do then. Very good grass too." 
Polly and Digory stared at one another in dismay. 
"Well, I do think someone might have arranged about our meals," said Digory. 
"I'm sure Aslan would have, if you'd asked him," said Fledge. 

"Wouldn't he know without being asked?" said Polly. 
"I've no doubt he would," said the Horse (still with his mouth full). "But I've a sort of idea he 
likes to be asked." 
"But what on earth are we to do?" asked Digory. 
"I'm sure I don't know," said Fledge. "Unless you try the grass. You might like it better than you 
think." 
"Oh, don't be silly," said Polly, stamping her foot. "Of course humans can't eat grass, any more 
than you could eat a mutton chop." 
"For goodness' sake don't talk about chops and things," said Digory. "It only makes it worse." 
Digory said that Polly had better take herself home by ring and get something to eat there; he 
couldn't himself because he had promised to go straight on his message for Aslan, and, if once he showed 
up again at home, anything might happen to prevent his getting back. But Polly said she wouldn't leave 
him, and Digory said it was jolly decent of her. 
"I say," said Polly, "I've still got the remains of that bag of toffee in my jacket. It'll be better than 
nothing." 
"A lot better," said Digory, "But be careful to get your hand into your pocket without touching 
your ring." 
This was a difficult and delicate job but they managed it in the end. The little paper bag was very 
squashy and sticky when they finally got it out, so that it was more a question of tearing the bag off the 
toffees than of getting the toffees out of the bag. Some grown-ups (you know how fussy they can be about 
that sort of thing) would rather have gone without supper altogether than eaten those toffees. There were 
nine of them all told. It was Digory who had the bright idea of eating four each and planting the ninth; for, 
as he said, "if the bar off the lamp-post turned into a little light-tree, why shouldn't this turn into a toffee

tree?" So they dibbled a small hole in the turf and buried the piece of toffee. Then they ate the other 
pieces, making them last as long as they could. It was a poor meal, even with all the paper they couldn't 
help eating as well. 
When Fledge had quite finished his own excellent supper he lay down. The children came and sat 
one on each side of him leaning against his warm body, and when he had spread a wing over each they 
were really quite snug. As the bright young stars of that new world came out they talked over everything: 
how Digory had hoped to get something for his Mother and how, instead of that, he had been sent on this 
message. And they repeated to one another all the signs by which they would know the places they were 
looking for - the blue lake and the hill with a garden on top of it. The talk was just beginning to slow 
down as they got sleepy, when suddenly Polly sat up wide awake and said "Hush!" 
Everyone listened as hard as they could. 
"Perhaps it was only the wind in the trees," said Digory presently. 
"I'm not so sure," said Fledge. "Anyway - wait! There it goes again. By Aslan, it is something." 
The horse scrambled to its feet with a great noise and a great upheaval; the children were already 
on theirs. Fledge trotted to and fro, sniffing and whinnying. The children tip-toed this way and that, 
looking behind every bush and tree. They kept on thinking they saw things, and there was one time when 
Polly was perfectly certain she had seen-a tall, dark figure gliding quickly away in a westerly direction. 
But they caught nothing and in the end Fledge lay down again and the children re-snuggled (if that is the 
right word) under his wings. They went to sleep at once. Fledge stayed awake much longer moving his 
ears to and fro in the darkness and sometimes giving a little shiver with his skin as if a fly had lighted on 
him: but in the end he too slept. 
"WAKE up, Digory, wake up, Fledge," came the voice of Polly. "It has turned into a toffee tree. 
And it's the loveliest morning." 

The low early sunshine was streaming through the wood and the grass was grey with dew and the 
cobwebs were like silver. Just beside them was a little, very darkwooded tree, about the size of an apple 
tree. The leaves were whitish and rather papery, like the herb called honesty, and it was loaded with little 
brown fruits that looked rather like dates. 
"Hurrah!" said Digory. "But I'm going to have a dip first." He rushed through a flowering thicket 
or two down to the river's edge. Have you ever bathed in a mountain river that is running in shallow 
cataracts over red and blue and yellow stones with the sun on it? It is as good as the sea: in some ways 
almost better. Of course, he had to dress again without drying but it was well worth it. When he came 
back, Polly went down and had her bathe; at least she said that was what she'd been doing, but we know 
she was not much of a swimmer and perhaps it is best not to ask too many questions. Fledge visited the 
river too but he only stood in midstream, stooping down for a long drink of water and then shaking his 
mane and neighing several times. 
Polly and Digory got to work on the toffee-tree. The fruit was delicious; not exactly like toffee - 
softer for one thing, and juicy - but like fruit which reminded one of toffee. Fledge also made an excellent 
breakfast; he tried one of the toffee fruits and liked it but said he felt more like grass at that hour in the 
morning. Then with some difficulty the children got on his back and the second journey began. 
It was even better than yesterday, partly because every one was feeling so fresh, and partly 
because the newly risen sun was at their backs and, of course, everything looks nicer when the light is 
behind you. It was a wonderful ride. The big snowy mountains rose above them in every direction. The 
valleys, far beneath them, were so green, and all the streams which tumbled down from the glaciers into 
the main river were so blue, that it was like flying over gigantic pieces of jewellery. They would have 
liked this part of the adventure to go on longer than it did. But quite soon they were all sniffing the air and 
saying "What is it?" and "Did you smell something?" and "Where's it coming from?" For a heavenly 
smell, warm and golden, as if from all the most delicious fruits and flowers of the world, was coming up 
to them from somewhere ahead. 
"It's coming from that valley with the lake in it," said Fledge. 
"So it is," said Digory. "And look! There's a green hill at the far end of the lake. And look how 
blue the water is." 
"It must be the Place," said all three. 

Fledge came lower and lower in wide circles. The icy peaks rose up higher and higher above. The 
air came up warmer and sweeter every moment, so sweet that it almost brought the tears to your eyes. 
Fledge was now gliding with his wings spread out motionless on each side, and his hoofs pawing for the 
ground. The steep green hill was rushing towards them. A moment later he alighted on its slope, a little 
awkwardly. The children rolled off, fell without hurting themselves on the warm, fine grass, and stood up 
panting a little. 
They were three-quarters of the way up the hill, and set out at once to climb to the top. (I don't 
think Fledge could have managed this without his wings to balance him and to give him the help of 
aflutter now and then.) All round the very top of the hill ran a high wall of green turf. Inside the wall trees 
were growing. Their branches hung out over the wall; their leaves showed not only green but also blue 
and silver when the wind stirred them. When the travellers reached the top they walked nearly all the way 
round it outside the green wall before they found the gates: high gates of gold, fast shut, facing due east. 
Up till now I think Fledge and Polly had had the idea that they would go in with Digory. But they 
thought so no longer. You never saw a place which was so obviously private. You could see at a glance 
that it belonged to someone else. Only a fool would dream of going in unless he had been sent there on 
very special business. Digory himself understood at once that the others wouldn't and couldn't come in 
with him. He went forward to the gates alone. 
When he had come close up to them he saw words written on the gold with silver letters; 
something like this: 
Come in by the gold gates or not at all, Take of my fruit for others or forbear, For those who steal 
or those who climb my wall Shall find their heart's desire and find despair. 
"Take of my fruit for others," said Digory to himself. "Well, that's what I'm going to do. It means 
I mustn't eat any myself, I suppose. I don't know what all that jaw in the last line is about. Come in by the 
gold gates. Well who'd want to climb a wall if he could get in by a gates.` But how do the gates open?" 
He laid his hand on them: and instantly they swung apart, opening inwards, turning on their hinges 
without the least noise. 
Now that he could see into the place it looked more private than ever. He went in very solemnly, 
looking about him. Everything was very quiet inside. Even the fountain which rose near the middle of the 
garden made only the faintest sound. The lovely smell was all round him: it was a happy place but very 

serious. 
He knew which was the right tree at once, partly because it stood in the very centre and partly 
because the great silver apples with which it was loaded shone so and cast a light of their own down on 
the shadowy places where the sunlight did not reach. He walked straight across to it, picked an apple, and 
put it in the breast pocket of his Norfolk jacket. But he couldn't help looking at it and smelling it before he 
put it away. 
It would have been better if he had not. A terrible thirst and hunger came over him and a longing 
to taste that fruit. He put it hastily into his pocket; but there were plenty of others. Could it be wrong to 
taste one? After all, he thought, the notice on the gate might not have been exactly an order; it might have 
been only a piece of advice - and who cares about advice? Or even if it were an order, would he be 
disobeying it by eating an apple? He had already obeyed the part about taking one "for others". 
While he was thinking of all this he happened to look up through the branches towards the top of 
the tree. There, on a branch above his head, a wonderful bird was roosting. I say "roosting" because it 
seemed almost asleep; perhaps not quite. The tiniest slit of one eye was open. It was larger than an eagle, 
its breast saffron, its head crested with scarlet, and its tail purple. 
"And it just shows," said Digory afterwards when he was telling the story to the others, "that you 
can't be too careful in these magical places. You never know what may be watching you." But I think 
Digory would not have taken an apple for himself in any case. Things like Do Not Steal were, I think, 
hammered into boys' heads a good deal harder in those days than they are now. Still, we can never be 
certain. 
Digory was just turning to go back to the gates when he stopped to have one last look around. He 
got a terrible shock. He was not alone. There, only a few yards away from him, stood the Witch. She was 
just throwing away the core of an apple which she had eaten. The juice was darker than you would expect 
and had made a horrid stain round her mouth. Digory guessed at once that she must have climbed in over 
the wall. And he began to see that there might be some sense in that last line about getting your heart's 
desire and getting despair along with it. For the Witch looked stronger and prouder than ever, and even, in 
a way, triumphant; but her face was deadly white, white as salt. 
All this flashed through Digory's mind in a second; then he took to his heels and ran for the gates 
as hard as he could pelt; the Witch after him. As soon as he was out, the gates closed behind him of their 
own accord. That gave him the lead but not for long. By the time he had reached the others and was 
shouting out "Quick, get on, Polly! Get up, Fledge", the Witch had climbed the wall, or vaulted over it, 
and was close behind him again. 

"Stay where you are," cried Digory, turning round to face her, "or we'll all vanish. Don't come an 
inch nearer." 
"Foolish boy," said the Witch. "Why do you run from me? I mean you no harm. If you do not stop 
and listen to me now, you will miss some knowledge that would have made you happy all your life." 
"Well I don't want to hear it, thanks," said Digory. But he did. 
"I know what errand you have come on," continued the Witch. "For it was I who was close beside 
you in the woods last night and heard all your counsels. You have plucked fruit in the garden yonder. You 
have it in your pocket now. And you are going to carry it back, untasted, to the Lion; for him to eat, for 
him to use. You simpleton! Do you know what that fruit is? I will tell you. It is the apple of youth, the 
apple of life. I know, for I have tasted it; and I feel already such changes in myself that I know I shall 
never grow old or die. Eat it, Boy, eat it; and you and I will both live forever and be king and queen of 
this whole world - or of your world, if we decide to go back there." 
"No thanks," said Digory, "I don't know that I care much about living on and on after everyone I 
know is dead. I'd rather live an ordinary time and die and go to Heaven." 
"But what about this Mother of yours whom you pretend to love so?" 
"What's she got to do with it?" said Digory. 
"Do you not see, Fool, that one bite of that apple would heal her? You have it in your pocket. We 
are here by ourselves and the Lion is far away. Use your Magic and go back to your own world. A minute 
later you can be at your Mother's bedside, giving her the fruit. Five minutes later you will see the colour 
coming back to her face. She will tell you the pain is gone. Soon she will tell you she feels stronger. Then 
she will fall asleep - think of that; hours of sweet natural sleep, without pain, without drugs. Next day 
everyone will be saying how wonderfully she has recovered. Soon she will be quite well again. All will be 
well again. Your home will be happy again. You will be like other boys." 

"Oh!" gasped Digory as if he had been hurt, and put his hand to his head. For he now knew that 
the most terrible choice lay before him. 
"What has the Lion ever done for you that you should be his slave?" said the Witch. "What can he 
do to you once you are back in your own world? And what would your Mother think if she knew that you 
could have taken her pain away and given her back her life and saved your Father's heart from being 
broken, and that you wouldn't - that you'd rather run messages for a wild animal in a strange world that is 
no business of yours?" 
"I - I don't think he is a wild animal," said Digory in a dried-up sort of voice. "He is - I don't know 
-" 
"Then he is something worse," said the Witch. "Look what he has done to you already; look how 
heartless he has made you. That is what he does to everyone who listens to him. Cruel, pitiless boy! you 
would let your own Mother die rather than -" 
"Oh shut up," said the miserable Digory, still in the same voice. "Do you think I don't see? But I - 
I promised." 
"Ah, but you didn't know what you were promising. And no one here can prevent you." 
"Mother herself," said Digory, getting the words out with difficulty, "wouldn't like it - awfully 
strict about keeping promises - and not stealing - and all that sort of thing. She'd tell me not to do it - 
quick as anything - if she was here." 
"But she need never know," said the Witch, speaking more sweetly than you would have thought 
anyone with so fierce a face could speak. "You wouldn't tell her how you'd got the apple. Your Father 
need never know. No one in your world need know anything about this whole story. You needn't take the 
little girl back with you, you know." 
That was where the Witch made her fatal mistake. Of course Digory knew that Polly could get 
away by her own ring as easily as he could get away by his. But apparently the Witch didn't know this. 
And the meanness of the suggestion that he should leave Polly behind suddenly made all the other things 
the Witch had been saying to him sound false and hollow. And even in the midst of all his misery, his 

head suddenly cleared, and he said (in a different and much louder' voice): 
"Look here; where do you come into all this? Why are you so precious fond of my Mother all of a 
sudden? What's it got to do with you? What's your game?" 
"Good for you, Digs," whispered Polly in his ear. "Quick! Get away now." She hadn't dared to say 
anything all through the argument because, you see, it wasn't her Mother who was dying. 
"Up then," said Digory, heaving her on to Fledge's back and then scrambling up as quickly as he 
could. The horse spread its wings. 
"Go then, Fools," called the Witch. "Think of me, Boy, when you lie old and weak and dying, and 
remember how you threw away the chance of endless youth! It won't be offered you again." 
They were already so high that they could only just hear her. Nor did the Witch waste any time 
gazing up at them; they saw her set off northward down the slope of the hill. 
They had started early that morning and what happened in the garden had not taken very long, so 
that Fledge and Polly both said they would easily get back to Narnia before nightfall. Digory never spoke 
on the way back, and the others were shy of speaking to him. He was very sad and he wasn't even sure all 
the time that he had done the right thing; but whenever he remembered the shining tears in Aslan's eyes he 
became sure. 
All day Fledge flew steadily with untiring wings; eastward with the river to guide him, through 
the mountains and over the wild wooded hills, and then over the great waterfall and down, and down, to 
where the woods of Narnia were darkened by the shadow of the mighty cliff, till at last, when the sky was 
growing red with sunset behind them, he saw a place where many creatures were gathered together by the 
riverside. And soon he could see Aslan himself in the midst of them. Fledge glided down, spread out his 
four legs, closed his wings, and landed cantering. Then he pulled up. The children dismounted. Digory 
saw all the animals, dwarfs, satyrs, nymphs, and other things drawing back to the left and right to make 
way for him. He walked up to Aslan, handed him the apple and said: 
"I've brought you the apple you wanted, sir." 

"WELL done," said Aslan in a voice that made the earth shake. Then Digory knew that all the 
Narnians had heard those words and that the story of them would be handed down from father to son in 
that new world for hundreds of years and perhaps forever. But he was in no danger of feeling conceited 
for he didn't think about it at all now that he was face to face with Aslan. This time he found he could 
look straight into the Lion's eyes. He had forgotten his troubles and felt absolutely content. 
"Well done, son of Adam," said the Lion again. "For this fruit you have hungered and thirsted and 
wept. No hand but yours shall sow the seed of the Tree that is to be the protection of Narnia. Throw the 
apple towards the river bank where the ground is soft." 
Digory did as he was told. Everyone had grown so quiet that you could hear the soft thump where 
it fell into the mud. 
"It is well thrown," said Aslan. "Let us now proceed to the Coronation of King Frank of Narnia 
and Helen his Queen." 
The children now noticed these two for the first time. They were dressed in strange and beautiful 
clothes, and from their shoulders rich robes flowed out behind them to where four dwarfs held up the 
King's train and four rivernymphs the Queen's. Their heads were bare; but Helen had let her hair down 
and it made a great improvement in her appearance. But it was neither hair nor clothes that made them 
look so different from their old selves. Their faces had a new expression, especially the King's. All the 
sharpness and cunning and quarrelsomeness which he had picked up as a London cabby seemed to have 
been washed away, and the courage and kindness which he had always had were easier to see. Perhaps it 
was the air of the young world that had done it, or talking with Aslan, or both. 
"Upon my word," whispered Fledge to Polly. "My old master's been changed nearly as much as I 
have! Why, he's a real master now." 

"Yes, but don't buzz in my ear like that," said Polly. "It tickles so." 
"Now," said Aslan, "some of you undo that tangle you have made with those trees and let us see 
what we shall find there." 
Digory now saw that where four trees grew close together their branches had all been laced 
together or tied together with switches so as to make a sort of cage. The two Elephants with their trunks 
and a few dwarfs with their little axes soon got it all undone. There were three things inside. One was a 
young tree that seemed to be made of gold; the second was a young tree that seemed to be made of silver; 
but the third was a miserable object in muddy clothes, sitting hunched up between them. 
"Gosh!" whispered Digory. "Uncle Andrew!" 
To explain all this we must go back a bit. The Beasts, you remember, had tried planting and 
watering him. When the watering brought him to his senses, he found himself soaking wet, buried up to 
his thighs in earth (which was quickly turning into mud) and surrounded by more wild animals than he 
had ever dreamed of in his life before. It is perhaps not surprising that he began to scream and howl. This 
was in a way a good thing, for it at last persuaded everyone (even the Warthog) that he was alive. So they 
dug him up again (his trousers were in a really shocking state by now). As soon as his legs were free he 
tried to bolt, but one swift curl of the Elephant's trunk round his waist soon put an end to that. Everyone 
now thought he must be safely kept somewhere till Aslan had time to come and see him and say what 
should be done about him. So they made a sort of cage or coop all round him. They then offered him 
everything they could; think of to eat. 
The Donkey collected great piles of thistles and threw them in, but Uncle Andrew didn't seem to 
care about them. The Squirrels bombarded him with volleys of nuts but he only covered his head with his 
hands and tried to keep out of the way. Several birds flew to and fro deligently dropping worms on him. 
The Bear was especially kind. During the afternoon he found a wild bees' nest and instead of eating it 
himself (which he would very much like to have done) this worthy creature brought it back to Uncle 
Andrew. But this was in fact the worst failure of all. The Bear lobbed the whole sticky mass over the top 
of the enclosure and unfortunately it hit Uncle Andrew slap in the face (not all the bees were dead). The 
Bear, who would not at all have minded being hit in the face by a honeycomb himself, could not 
understand why Uncle Andrew staggered back, slipped, and sat down. And it was sheer bad luck that he 
sat down on the pile of thistles. "And anyway," as the Warthog said, "quite a lot of honey has got into the 
creature's mouth and that's bound to have done it some good." They were really getting quite fond of their 
strange pet and hoped that Aslan would allow them to keep it. The cleverer ones were quite sure by now 
that at least some of the noises which came out of his mouth had a meaning. They christened him Brandy 

because he made that noise so often. 
In the end, however, they had to leave him there for the night. Aslan was busy all that day 
instructing the new King and Queen and doing other important things, and could not attend to "poor old 
Brandy". What with the nuts, pears, apples, and bananas that had been thrown in to him, he did fairly well 
for supper; but it wouldn't be true to say that he passed an agreeable night. 
"Bring out that creature," said Aslan. One of the Elephants lifted Uncle Andrew in its trunk and 
laid him at the Lion's feet. He was too frightened to move. 
"Please, Aslan," said Polly, "could you say something to - to unfrighten him? And then could you 
say something to prevent him from ever coming back here again?" 
"Do you think he wants to?" said Aslan. 
"Well, Aslan," said Polly, "he might send someone else. He's so excited about the bar off the 
lamp-post growing into a lamp-post tree and he thinks -" 
"He thinks great folly, child," said Aslan. "This world is bursting with life for these few days 
because the song with which I called it into life still hangs in the air and rumbles in the ground. It will not 
be so for long. But I cannot tell that to this old sinner, and I cannot comfort him either; he has made 
himself unable to hear my voice. If I spoke to him, he would hear only growlings and roarings. Oh 
Adam's sons, how cleverly you defend yourselves against all that might do you good! But I will give him 
the only gift he is still able to receive." 
He bowed his great head rather sadly, and breathed into the Magician's terrified face. "Sleep," he 
said. "Sleep and be separated for some few hours from all the torments you have devised for yourself." 
Uncle Andrew immediately rolled over with closed eyes and began breathing peacefully. 
"Carry him aside and lay him down," said Aslan. "Now, dwarfs! Show your smith-craft. Let me 
see you make two crowns for your King and Queen." 

More Dwarfs than you could dream of rushed forward to the Golden Tree. They had all its leaves 
stripped off, and some of its branches torn off too, before you could say Jack Robinson. And now the 
children could see that it did not merely look golden but was of real, soft gold. It had of course sprung up 
from the half-sovereigns which had fallen out of Uncle Andrew's pocket when he was turned upside 
down; just as the silver had grown up from the half-crowns. From nowhere, as it seemed, piles of dry 
brushwood for fuel, a little anvil, hammers, tongs, and bellows were produced. Next moment (how those 
dwarfs loved their work!) the fire was blazing, the bellows were roaring, the gold was melting, the 
hammers were clinking. Two Moles, whom Aslan had set to dig (which was what they liked best) earlier 
in the day, poured out a pile of precious stones at the dwarfs' feet. Under the clever fingers of the little 
smiths two crowns took shape - not ugly, heavy things like modern European crowns, but light, delicate, 
beautifully shaped circles that you could really wear and look nicer by wearing. The King's was set with 
rubies and the Queen's with emeralds. 
When the crowns had been cooled in the river Aslan made Frank and Helen kneel before him and 
he placed the crowns on their heads. Then he said, "Rise up King and Queen of Narnia, father and mother 
of many kings that shall be in Narnia and the Isles and Archenland. Be just and merciful and brave. The 
blessing is upon you." 
Then everyone cheered or bayed or neighed or trumpeted or clapped its wings and the royal pair 
stood looking solemn and a little shy, but all the nobler for their shyness. And while Digory was still 
cheering he heard the deep voice of Aslan beside him, saying: 
"Look!" 
Everyone in that crowd turned its head, and then everyone drew a long breath of wonder and 
delight. A little way off, towering over their heads, they saw a tree which had certainly not been there 
before. It must have grown up silently, yet swiftly as a flag rises when you pull it up on a flagstaff, while 
they were all busied about the coronation. Its spreading branches seemed to cast a light rather than a 
shade, and silver apples peeped out like stars from under every leaf. But it was the smell which came from 
it, even more than the sight, that had made everyone draw in their breath. For a moment one could hardly 
think about anything else. 
"Son of Adam," said Aslan, "you have sown well. And you, Narnians, let it be your first care to 
guard this Tree, for it is your Shield. The Witch of whom I told you has fled far away into the North of the 
world; she will live on there, growing stronger in dark Magic. But while that Tree flourishes she will 
never come down into Narnia. She dare not come within a hundred miles of the Tree, for its smell, which 
is joy and life and health to you, is death and horror and despair to her." 

Everyone was staring solemnly at the Tree when Aslan suddenly swung round his head 
(scattering golden gleams of light from his mane as he did so) and fixed his large eyes on the children. 
"What is it, children?" he said, for he caught them in the very act of whispering and nudging one another. 
"Oh - Aslan, sir," said Digory, turning red, "I forgot to tell you. The Witch has already eaten one 
of those apples, one of the same kind that Tree grew from." He hadn't really said all he was thinking, but 
Polly at once said it for him (Digory was always much more afraid than she of looking a fool.) 
"So we thought, Aslan," she said, "that there must be some mistake, and she can't really mind the 
smell of those apples." 
"Why do you think that, Daughter of Eve?" asked the Lion. ' 
"Well, she ate one." 
"Child," he replied, "that is why all the rest are now a horror to her. That is what happens to those 
who pluck and eat fruits at the wrong time and in the wrong way. The fruit is good, but they loathe it ever 
after." 
"Oh I see," said Polly. "And I suppose because she took it in the wrong way it won't work for her. 
I mean it won't make her always young and all that?" 
"Alas," said Aslan, shaking his head. "It will. Things always work according to their nature. She 
has won her heart's desire; she has unwearying strength and endless days like a goddess. But length of 
days with an evil heart is only length of misery and already she begins to know it. All get what they want; 
they do not always like it." 
"I - I nearly ate one myself, Aslan," said Digory. "Would I -" 
"You would, child," said Aslan. "For the fruit always works - it must work - but it does not work 
happily for any who pluck it at their own will. If any Narnian, unbidden, had stolen an apple and planted 
it here to protect Narnia, it would have protected Narnia. But it would have done so by making Narnia 

into another strong and cruel empire like Charn, not the kindly land I mean it to be. And the Witch 
tempted you to do another thing, my son, did she not?" 
"Yes, Aslan. She wanted me to take an apple home to Mother." 
"Understand, then, that it would have healed her; but not to your joy or hers. The day would have 
come when both you and she would have looked back and said it would have been better to die in that 
illness." 
And Digory could say nothing, for tears choked him and he gave up all hopes of saving his 
Mother's life; but at the same time he knew that the Lion knew what would have happened, and that there 
might be things more terrible even than losing someone you love by death. But now Aslan was speaking 
again, almost in a whisper: 
"That is what would have happened, child, with a stolen apple. It is not what will happen now. 
What I give you now will bring joy. It will not, in your world, give endless life, but it will heal. Go. Pluck 
her an apple from the Tree." 
For a second Digory could hardly understand. It was as if the whole world had turned inside out 
and upside down. And then, like someone in a dream, he was walking across to the Tree, and the King 
and Queen were cheering him and all the creatures were cheering too. He plucked the apple and put it in 
his pocket. Then he came back to Aslan. 
"Please," he said, "may we go home now?" He had forgotten to say "Thank you", but he meant it, 
and Aslan understood. 

"You need no rings when I am with you," said the voice of Aslan. The children blinked and 
looked about them. They were once more in the Wood between the Worlds; Uncle Andrew lay on the 
grass, still asleep; Aslan stood beside them. 
"Come," said Aslan; "it is time that you went back. But there are two things to see to first; a 
warning, and a command. Look here, children." 
They looked and saw a little hollow in the grass, with a grassy bottom, warm and dry. 
"When you were last here," said Aslan, "that hollow was a pool, and when you jumped into it you 
came to the world where a dying sun shone over the ruins of Charn. There is no pool now. That world is 
ended, as if it had never been. Let the race of Adam and Eve take warning." 
"Yes, Aslan," said both the children. But Polly added, "But we're not quite as bad as that world, 
are we, Aslan?" 
"Not yet, Daughter of Eve," he said. "Not yet. But you are growing more like it. It is not certain 
that some wicked one of your race will not find out a secret as evil as the Deplorable Word and use it to 
destroy all living things. And soon, very soon, before you are an old man and an old woman, great nations 
in your world will be ruled by tyrants who care no more for joy and justice and mercy than the Empress 
Jadis. Let your world beware. That is the warning. Now for the command. As soon as you can, take from 
this Uncle of yours his magic rings and bury them so that no one can use them again." 
Both the children were looking up into the Lion's face as he spoke these words. And all at once 
(they never knew exactly how it happened) the face seemed to be a sea of tossing gold in which they were 
floating, and such a sweetness and power rolled about them and over them and entered them that they felt 
they had never really been happy or wise or good, or even alive and awake, before. And the memory of 
that moment stayed with them always, so that as long as they both lived, if ever they were sad or afraid or 
angry, the thought of all that golden goodness, and the feeling that it was still there, quite close, just round 
some corner or just behind some door, would come back and make them sure, deep down inside, that all 
was well. Next minute all three of them (Uncle Andrew now awake) came tumbling into the noise, heat, 
and hot smells of London. 
They were on the pavement outside the Ketterleys' front door, and except that the Witch, the 

Horse, and the Cabby were gone, everything was exactly as they had left it. There was the lamp-post, with 
one arm missing; there was the wreck of the hansom cab; and there was the crowd. Everyone was still 
talking and people were kneeling beside the damaged policeman, saying things like, "He's coming round" 
or "How do you feel now, old chap?" or "The Ambulance will be here in a jiffy." 
"Great Scott!" thought Digory, "I believe the whole adventure's taken no time at all." 
Most people were wildly looking round for Jadis and the horse. No one took any notice of the 
children for no one had seen them go or noticed them coming back. As for Uncle Andrew, what between 
the state of his clothes and the honey on his face, he could not have been recognised by anyone. 
Fortunately the front door of the house was-open and the housemaid was standing in the doorway staring 
at the fun (what a day that girl was having!) so the children had no difficulty in bustling Uncle Andrew 
indoors before anyone asked any questions. 
He raced up the stirs before them and at first they were very afraid he was heading for his attic 
and meant to hide his remaining magic rings. But they needn't have bothered. What he was thinking about 
was the bottle in his wardrobe, and he disappeared at once into his bedroom and locked the door. When he 
came out again (which was not for a long time) he was in his dressinggown and made straight for the 
bathroom. 
"Can you get the other rings, Poll?" said Digory. "I want to go to Mother." 
"Right. See you later," said Polly and clattered up the attic stairs. 
Then Digory took a minute to get his breath, and then went softly into his Mother's room. And 
there she lay, as he had seen her lie so many other times, propped up on the pillows, with a thin, pale face 
that would make you cry to look at. Digory took the Apple of Life out of his pocket. 
And just as the Witch Jadis had looked different when you saw her in our world instead of in her 
own, so the fruit of that mountain garden looked different too. There were of course all sorts of coloured 
things in the bedroom; the coloured counterpane on the bed, the wallpaper, the sunlight from the window, 
and Mother's pretty, pale blue dressing jacket. But the moment Digory took the Apple out of his pocket, 
all those things seemed to have scarcely any colour at all. Every one of them, even the sunlight, looked 
faded and dingy. The brightness of the Apple threw strange lights on the ceiling. Nothing else was worth 
looking at: you couldn't look at anything else. And the smell of the Apple of Youth was as if there was a 
window in the room that opened on Heaven. 

"Oh, darling, how lovely," said Digory's Mother. 
"You will eat it, won't you? Please," said Digory. 
"I don't know what the Doctor would say," she answered. "But really - I almost feel as if I could." 
He peeled it and cut it up and gave it to her piece by piece. And no sooner had she finished it than 
she smiled and her head sank back on the pillow and she was asleep: a real, natural, gentle sleep, without 
any of those nasty drugs, which was, as Digory knew, the thing in the whole world that she wanted most. 
And he was sure now that her face looked a little different. He bent down and kissed her very softly and 
stole out of the room with a beating heart; taking the core of the apple with him. For the rest of that day, 
whenever he looked at the things about him, and saw how ordinary and unmagical they were, he hardly 
dared to hope; but when he remembered the face of Aslan he did hope. 
That evening he buried the core of the Apple in the back garden. 
Next morning when the Doctor made his usual visit, Digory leaned over the banisters to listen. He 
heard the Doctor come out with Aunt Letty and say: 
"Miss Ketterley, this is the most extraordinary case I have known in my whole medical career. It 
is - it is like a miracle. I wouldn't tell the little boy anything at present; we don't want to raise any false 
hopes. But in my opinion -" then his voice became too low to hear. 
That afternoon he went down the garden and whistled their agreed secret signal for Polly (she 
hadn't been able to get back the day before). 
"What luck?" said Polly, looking over the wall. "I mean, about your Mother?" 
"I think - I think it is going to be alright," said Digory. "But if you don't mind I'd really rather not 

talk about it yet. What about the rings?" 
"I've got them all," said Polly. "Look, it's alright, I'm wearing gloves. Let's bury them." 
"Yes, let's. I've marked the place where I buried the core of the Apple yesterday." 
Then Polly came over the wall and they went together to the place. But, as it turned out, Digory 
need not have marked the place. Something was already coming up. It was not growing so that you could 
see it grow as the new trees had done in Narnia; but it was already well above ground. They got a trowel 
and buried all the magic rings, including their own ones, in a circle round it. 
About a week after this it was quite certain that Digory's Mother was getting better. About a 
fortnight later she was able to sit out in the garden. And a month later that whole house had become a 
different place. Aunt Letty did everything that Mother liked; windows were opened, frowsy curtains were 
drawn back to brighten up the rooms, there were new flowers everywhere, and nicer things to eat, and the 
old piano was tuned and Mother took up her singing again, and had such games with Digory and Polly 
that Aunt Letty would say "I declare, Mabel, you're the biggest baby of the three." 
When things go wrong, you'll find they usually go on getting worse for some time; but when 
things once start going right they often go on getting better and better. After about six weeks of this lovely 
life there came a long letter from Father in India, which had wonderful news in it. Old Great-Uncle Kirke 
had died and this meant, apparently, that Father was now very rich. He was going to retire and come home 
from India forever and ever. And the great big house in the country, which Digory had heard of all his life 
and never seen would now be their home; the big house with the suits of armour, the stables, the kennels, 
the river, the park, the hot-houses, the vineries, the woods, and the mountains behind it. So that Digory 
felt just as sure as you that they were all going to live happily ever after. But perhaps you would like to 
know just one or two things more. 
Polly and Digory were always great friends and she came nearly every holidays to stay with them 
at their beautiful house in the country; and that was where she learned to ride and swim and milk and bake 
and climb. 
In Narnia the Beasts lived in great peace and joy and neither the Witch nor any other enemy came 
to trouble that pleasant land for many hundred years. King Frank and Queen Helen and their children 
lived happily in Narnia and their second son became King of Archenland. The boys married nymphs and 
the girls married woodgods and river-gods. The lamp-post which the Witch had planted (without knowing 

it) shone day and night in the Narnian forest, so that the place where it grew came to be called Lantern 
Waste; and when, many years later, another child from our world got into Narnia, on a snowy night, she 
found the light still burning. And that adventure was, in a way, connected with the ones I have just been 
telling you. 
It was like this. The tree which sprang from the Apple that Digory planted in the back garden, 
lived and grew into a fine tree. Growing in the soil of our world, far out of the sound of Aslan's voice and 
far from the young air of Narnia, it did not bear apples that would revive a dying woman as Digory's 
Mother had been revived, though it did bear apples more beautiful than any others in England, and they 
were extremely good for you, though not fully magical. But inside itself, in the very sap of it, the tree (so 
to speak) never forgot that other tree in Narnia to which it belonged. Sometimes it would move 
mysteriously when there was no wind blowing: I think that when this happened there were high winds in 
Narnia and the English tree quivered because, at that moment, the Narnia tree was rocking and swaying in 
a strong south-western gale. However, that might be, it was proved later that there was still magic in its 
wood. For when Digory was quite middle-aged (and he was a famous learned man, a Professor, and a 
great traveller by that time) and the Ketterleys' old house belonged to him, there was a great storm all over 
the south of England which blew the tree down. He couldn't bear to have it simply chopped up for 
firewood, so he had part of the timber made into a wardrobe, which he put in his big house in the country. 
And though he himself did not discover the magic properties of that wardrobe, someone else did. That 
was the beginning of all the comings and goings between Narnia and our world, which you can read of in 
other books. 
When Digory and his people went to live in the big country house, they took Uncle Andrew to 
live with them; for Digory's Father said, "We must try to keep the old fellow out of mischief, and it isn't 
fair that poor Letty should have him always on her hands." Uncle Andrew never tried any Magic again as 
long as he lived. He had learned his lesson, and in his old age he became a nicer and less selfish old man 
than he had ever been before. But he always liked to get visitors alone in the billiard-room and tell them 
stories about a mysterious lady, a foreign royalty, with whom he had driven about London. "A devilish 
temper she had," he would say. "But she was a dem fine woman, sir, a dem fine woman." 
IN the last days of Narnia, far up to the west beyond Lantern Waste and close beside the great waterfall, 
there lived an Ape. He was so old that no one could remember when he had first come to live in those 
parts, and he was the cleverest, ugliest, most wrinkled Ape you can imagine. He had a little house, built of 
wood and thatched with leaves, up in the fork of a great tree, and his name was Shift. There were very few 
Talking Beasts or Men or Dwarfs, or people of any sort, in that part of the wood, but Shift had one friend 
and neighbour who was a donkey called Puzzle. At least they both said they were friends, but from the 
way things went on you might have thought Puzzle was more like Shift's servant than his friend. He did 
all the work. When they went together to the river, Shift filled the big skin bottles with water but it was 
Puzzle who carried them back. When they wanted anything from the towns further down the river it was 
Puzzle who went down with empty panniers on his back and came back with the panniers full and heavy. 
And all the nicest things that Puzzle brought back were eaten by Shift; for as Shift said, "You see, Puzzle, 
I can't eat grass and thistles like you, so it's only fair I should make it up in other ways." And Puzzle 
always said, "Of course, Shift, of course. I see that." Puzzle never complained, because he knew that Shift 
was far cleverer than himself and he thought it was very kind of Shift to be friends with him at all. And if 
ever Puzzle did try to argue about anything, Shift would always say, "Now, Puzzle, I understand what 
needs to be done better than you. You know you're not clever, Puzzle." And Puzzle always said, "No, 
Shift. It's quite true. I'm not clever." Then he would sigh and do whatever Shift had said. 
One morning early in the year the pair of them were out walking along the shore of Caldron Pool. 
Caldron Pool is the big pool right under the cliffs at the western end of Narnia. The great waterfall pours 
down into it with a noise like everlasting thunder, and the River of Narnia flows out on the other side. The 
waterfall keeps the Pool always dancing and bubbling and churning round and round as if it were on the 
boil, and that of course is how it got its name of Caldron Pool. It is liveliest in the early spring when the 
waterfall is swollen with all the snow that has melted off the mountains from up beyond Narnia in the 
Western Wild from which the river comes. And as they looked at Caldron Pool Shift suddenly pointed 
with his dark, skinny finger and said, 
"Look! What's that?" 
"What's what?" said Puzzle. 
"That yellow thing that's just come down the waterfall. Look! There it is again, it's floating. We must find 
out what it is." 
"Must we?" said Puzzle. 

"Of course we must," said Shift. "It may be something useful. Just hop into the Pool like a good fellow 
and fish it out. Then we can have a proper look at it." 
"Hop into the Pool?" said Puzzle, twitching his long ears. 
"Well how are we to get it if you don't?" said the Ape. 
"But - but," said Puzzle, "wouldn't it be better if you went in? Because, you see, it's you who wants to 
know what it is, and I don't much. And you've got hands, you see. You're as good as a Man or a Dwarf 
when it comes to catching hold of things. I've only got hoofs." 
"Really, Puzzle," said Shift, "I didn't think you'd ever say a thing like that. I didn't think it of you, really." 
"Why, what have I said wrong?" said the Ass, speaking in rather a humble voice, for he saw that Shift 
was very deeply offended. "All I meant was -" 
"Wanting me to go into the water," said the Ape. "As if you didn't know perfectly well what weak chests 
Apes always have and how easily they catch cold! Very well. I will go in. I'm feeling cold enough already 
in this cruel wind. But I'll go in. I shall probably die. Then you'll be sorry." And Shift's voice sounded as 
if he was just going to burst into tears. 
"Please don't, please don't, please don't," said Puzzle, half braying, and half talking. "I never meant 
anything of the sort, Shift, really I didn't. You know how stupid I am and how I can't think of more than 
one thing at a time. I'd forgotten about your weak chest. Of course I'll go in. You mustn't think of doing it 
yourself. Promise me you won't, Shift." 
So Shift promised, and Puzzle went cloppety-clop on his four hoofs round the rocky edge of the Pool to 
find a place where he could get in. Quite apart from the cold it was no joke getting into that quivering and 
foaming water, and Puzzle had to stand and shiver for a whole minute before he made up his mind to do 
it. But then Shift called out from behind him and said: "Perhaps I'd better do it after all, Puzzle." And 
when Puzzle heard that he said, "No, no. You promised. I'm in now," and in he went. 

A great mass of foam got him in the face and filled his mouth with water and blinded him. Then he went 
under altogether for a few seconds, and when he came up again he was in quite another part of the Pool. 
Then the swirl caught him and carried him round and round and faster and faster till it took him right 
under the waterfall itself, and the force of the water plunged him down, deep down, so that he thought he 
would never be able to hold his breath till he came up again. And when he had come up and when at last 
he got somewhere near the thing he was trying to catch, it sailed away from him till it too got under the 
fall and was forced down to the bottom. When it came up again it was further from him than ever. But at 
last, when he was almost tired to death, and bruised all over and numb with cold, he succeeded in 
gripping the thing with his teeth. And out he came carrying it in front of him and getting his front hoofs 
tangled up in it, for it was as big as a large hearthrug, and it was very heavy and cold and slimy. 
He flung it down in front of Shift and stood dripping and shivering and trying to get his breath back. But 
the Ape never looked at him or asked him how he felt. The Ape was too busy going round and round the 
Thing and spreading it out and patting it and smelling it. Then a wicked gleam came into his eye and he 
said: 
"It is a lion's skin." 
"Ee - auh - auh - oh, is it?" gasped Puzzle. 
"Now I wonder . . . I wonder . . . I wonder," said Shift to himself, for he was thinking very hard. 
"I wonder who killed the poor lion," said Puzzle presently. "It ought to be buried. We must have a 
funeral." 
"Oh, it wasn't a Talking Lion," said Shift. "You needn't bother about that. There are no Talking Beasts up 
beyond the Falls, up in the Western Wild. This skin must have belonged to a dumb, wild lion." 
This, by the way, was true. A Hunter, a Man, had killed and skinned this lion somewhere up in the 
Western Wild several months before. But that doesn't come into this story. 
"All the same, Shift," said Puzzle, "even if the skin only belonged to a dumb, wild lion, oughtn't we to 

give it a decent burial? I mean, aren't all lions rather - well, rather solemn? Because of you know Who. 
Don't you see?" 
"Don't you start getting ideas into your head, Puzzle," said Shift. "Because, you know, thinking isn't your 
strong point. We'll make this skin into a fine warm winter coat for you." 
"Oh, I don't think I'd like that," said the Donkey. "It would look - I mean, the other Beasts might think - 
that is to say, I shouldn't feel -" 
"What are you talking about?" said Shift, scratching himself the wrong way up as Apes do. 
"I don't think it would be respectful to the Great Lion, to Aslan himself, if an ass like me went about 
dressed up in a lion-skin," said Puzzle. 
"Now don't stand arguing, please," said Shift. "What does an ass like you know about things of that sort? 
You know you're no good at thinking, Puzzle, so why don't you let me do your thinking for you? Why 
don't you treat me as I treat you? I don't think I can do everything. I know you're better at some things 
than I am. That's why I let you go into the Pool; I knew you'd do it better than me. But why can't I have 
my turn when it comes to something I can do and you can't? Am I never to be allowed to do anything? Do 
be fair. Turn and turn about." 
"Oh, well, of course, if you put it that way," said Puzzle. 
"I tell you what," said Shift. "You'd better take a good brisk trot down river as far as Chippingford and 
see if they have any oranges or bananas." 
"But I'm so tired, Shift," pleaded Puzzle. 
"Yes, but you are very cold and wet," said the Ape. "You want something to warm you up. A brisk trot 
would be just the thing. Besides, it's market day at Chippingford today." And then of course Puzzle said 
he would go. 

As soon as he was alone Shift went shambling along, sometimes on two paws and sometimes on four, till 
he reached his own tree. Then he swung himself up from branch to branch, chattering and grinning all the 
time, and went into his little house. He found needle and thread and a big pair of scissors there; for he was 
a clever Ape and the Dwarfs had taught him how to sew. He put the ball of thread (it was very thick stuff, 
more like cord than thread) into his mouth so that his cheek bulged out as if he were sucking a big bit of 
toffee. He held the needle between his lips and took the scissors in his left paw. Then he came down the 
tree and shambled across to the lion-skin. He squatted down and got to work. 
He saw at once that the body of the lion-skin would be too long for Puzzle and its neck too short. So he 
cut a good piece out of the body and used it to make a long collar for Puzzle's long neck. Then he cut off 
the head and sewed the collar in between the head and the shoulders. He put threads on both sides of the 
skin so that it would tie up under Puzzle's chest and stomach. Every now and then a bird would pass 
overhead and Shift would stop his work, looking anxiously up. He did not want anyone to see what he 
was doing. But none of the birds he saw were Talking Birds, so it didn't matter. 
Late in the afternoon Puzzle came back. He was not trotting but only plodding patiently along, the way 
donkeys do. 
"There weren't any oranges," he said, "and there weren't any bananas. And I'm very tired." He lay down. 
"Come and try on your beautiful new lion-skin coat," said Shift. 
"Oh bother that old skin," said Puzzle. "I'll try it on in the morning. I'm too tired tonight." 
"You are unkind, Puzzle," said Shift. "If you're tired what do you think I am? All day long, while you've 
been having a lovely refreshing walk down the valley, I've been working hard to make you a coat. My 
paws are so tired I can hardly hold these scissors. And you won't say thank you -and you won't even look 
at the coat -and you don't care - and- and-" 
"My dear Shift," said Puzzle getting up at once, "I am so sorry. I've been horrid. Of course I'd love to try 
it on. And it looks simply splendid. Do try it on me at once. Please do." 

"Well, stand still then," said the Ape. The skin was very heavy for him to lift, but in the end, with a lot of 
pulling and pushing and puffing and blowing, he got it on to the donkey. He tied it underneath Puzzle's 
body and he tied the legs to Puzzle's legs and the tail to Puzzle's tail. A good deal of Puzzle's grey nose 
and face could be seen through the open mouth of the lion's head. No one who had ever seen a real lion 
would have been taken in for a moment. But if someone who had never seen a lion looked at Puzzle in his 
lion-skin he just might mistake him for a lion, if he didn't come too close, and if the light was not too 
good, and if Puzzle didn't let out a bray and didn't make any noise with his hoofs. 
"You look wonderful, wonderful," said the Ape. "If anyone saw you now, they'd think you were Aslan, 
the Great Lion, himself." 
"That would be dreadful," said Puzzle. 
"No it wouldn't," said Shift. "Everyone would do whatever you told them." 
"But I don't want to tell them anything." 
"But you think of the good we could do!" said Shift. "You'd have me to advise you, you know. I'd think 
of sensible orders for you to give. And everyone would have to obey us, even the King himself. We 
would set everything right in Narnia." 
"But isn't everything right already?" said Puzzle. 
"What!" cried Shift. "Everything right?-when there are no oranges or bananas?" 
"Well, you know," said Puzzle, "there aren't many people - in fact, I don't think there's anyone but 
yourself who wants those sort of things." 
"There's sugar too," said Shift. 

"H'm yes," said the Ass. "It would be nice if there was more sugar." 
"Well then, that's settled," said the Ape. "You will pretend to be Aslan, and I'll tell you what to say." 
"No, no, no," said Puzzle. "Don't say such dreadful things. It would be wrong, Shift. I maybe not very 
clever but I know that much. What would become of us if the real Aslan turned up?" 
"I expect he'd be very pleased," said Shift. "Probably he sent us the lion-skin on purpose, so that we could 
set things to right. Anyway, he never does turn up, you know. Not nowadays." 
At that moment there came a great thunderclap right overhead and the ground trembled with a small 
earthquake. Both the animals lost their balance and were flung on their faces. 
"There!" gasped Puzzle, as soon as he had breath to speak. "It's a sign, a warning. I knew we were doing 
something dreadfully wicked. Take this wretched skin off me at once." 
"No, no," said the Ape (whose mind worked very quickly). "It's a sign the other way. I was just going to 
say that if the real Aslan, as you call him, meant us to go on with this, he would send us a thunderclap and 
an earth-tremor. It was just on the tip of my tongue, only the sign itself came before I could get the words 
out. You've got to do it now, Puzzle. And please don't let us have any more arguing. You know you don't 
understand these things. What could a donkey know about signs?" 
About three weeks later the last of the Kings of Narnia sat under the great oak which grew beside the 
door of his little hunting lodge, where he often stayed for ten days or so in the pleasant spring weather. It 
was a low, thatched building not far from the Eastern end of Lantern Waste and some way above the 
meeting of the two rivers. He loved to live there simply and at ease, away from the state and pomp of Cair 
Paravel, the royal city. His name was King Tirian, and he was between twenty and twenty-five years old; 

his shoulders were already broad and strong and his limbs full of hard muscle, but his beard was still 
scanty. He had blue eyes and a fearless, honest face. 
There was no one with him that spring morning except his dearest friend, Jewel the Unicorn. They loved 
each other like brothers and each had saved the other's life in the wars. The lordly beast stood close beside 
the King's chair, with its neck bent round polishing its blue horn against the creamy whiteness of its flank. 
"I cannot set myself to any work or sport today, Jewel," said the King. "I can think of nothing but this 
wonderful news. Think you we shall hear any more of it today?" 
"They are the most wonderful tidings ever heard in our days or our fathers' or our grandfathers' days, 
Sire," said Jewel, "if they are true." 
"How can they choose but be true?" said the King. "It is more than a week ago that the first birds came 
flying over us saying, Aslan is here, Aslan has come to Narnia again. And after that it was the squirrels. 
They had not seen him, but they said it was certain he was in the woods. Then came the Stag. He said he 
had seen him with his own eyes, a great way off, by moonlight, in Lantern Waste. Then came that dark 
Man with the beard, the merchant from Calormen. The Calormenes care nothing for Aslan as we do; but 
the man spoke of it as a thing beyond doubt. And there was the Badger last night; he too had seen Aslan." 
"Indeed, Sire," answered Jewel, "I believe it all. If I seem not to, it is only that my joy is too great to let 
my belief settle itself. It is almost too beautiful to believe." 
"Yes," said the King with a great sigh, almost a shiver, of delight. "It is beyond all that I ever hoped for in 
all my life." 
"Listen!" said Jewel, putting his head on one side and cocking his ears forward. 
"What is it?" asked the King. 
"Hoofs, Sire," said Jewel. "A galloping horse. A very heavy horse. It must be one of the Centaurs. And 
look, there he is." 

A great, golden bearded Centaur, with man's sweat on his forehead and horse's sweat on his chestnut 
flanks, dashed up to the King, stopped, and bowed low. "Hail, King," it cried in a voice as deep as a bull's. 
"Ho, there!" said the King, looking over his shoulder towards the door of the hunting lodge. "A bowl of 
wine for the noble Centaur. Welcome, Roonwit. When you have found your breath you shall tell us your 
errand." 
A page came out of the house carrying a great wooden bowl, curiously carved, and handed it to the 
Centaur. The Centaur raised the bowl and said, 
"I drink first to Aslan and truth, Sire, and secondly to your Majesty." 
He finished the wine (enough for six strong men) at one draught and handed the empty bowl back to the 
page. 
"Now, Roonwit," said the King. "Do you bring us more news of Aslan?" 
Roonwit looked very grave, frowning a little. 
"Sire," he said. "You know how long I have lived and studied the stars; for we Centaurs live longer than 
you Men, and even longer than your kind, Unicorn. Never in all my days have I seen such terrible things 
written in the skies as there have been nightly since this year began. The stars say nothing of the coming 
of Aslan, nor of peace, nor of joy. I know by my art that there have not been such disastrous conjunctions 
of the planets for five hundred years. It was already in my mind to come and warn your Majesty that some 
great evil hangs over Narnia. But last night the rumour reached me that Aslan is abroad in Narnia. Sire, do 
not believe this tale. It cannot be. The stars never lie, but Men and Beasts do. If Aslan were really coming 
to Narnia the sky would have foretold it. If he were really come, all the most gracious stars would be 
assembled in his honour. It is all a lie." 
"A lie!" said the King fiercely. "What creature in Narnia or all the world would dare to lie on such a 
matter?" And, without knowing it, he laid his hand on his sword hilt. 

"That I know not, Lord King," said the Centaur. "But I know there are liars on earth; there are none 
among the stars." 
"I wonder," said Jewel, "whether Aslan might not come though all the stars foretold otherwise. He is not 
the slave of the stars but their Maker. Is it not said in all the old stories that He is not a tame lion." 
"Well said, well said, Jewel," cried the King. "Those are the very words: not a tame lion. It comes in 
many tales." 
Roonwit had just raised his hand and was leaning forward to say something very earnestly to the King 
when all three of them turned their heads to listen to a wailing sound that was quickly drawing nearer. The 
wood was so thick to the West of them that they could not see the newcomer yet. But they could soon 
hear the words. 
"Woe, woe, woe!" called the voice. "Woe for my brothers and sisters! Woe for the holy trees! The woods 
are laid waste. The axe is loosed against us. We are being felled. Great trees are falling, falling, falling." 
With the last "falling" the speaker came in sight. She was like a woman but so tall that her head was on a 
level with the Centaur's yet she was like a tree too. It is hard to explain if you have never seen a Dryad but 
quite unmistakable once you have - something different in the colour, the voice, and the hair. King Tirian 
and the two Beasts knew at once that she was the nymph of a beech tree. 
"Justice, Lord King!" she cried. "Come to our aid. Protect your people. They are felling us in Lantern 
Waste. 
Forty great trunks of my brothers and sisters are already on the ground." 
"What, Lady! Felling Lantern Waste? Murdering the talking trees?" cried the King, leaping to his feet 
and drawing his sword. "How dare they? And who dares it? Now by the Mane of Aslan-" 

"A-a-a-h," gasped the Dryad shuddering as if in pain - shuddering time after time as if under repeated 
blows. Then all at once she fell sideways as suddenly as if both her feet had been cut from under her. For 
a second they saw her lying dead on the grass and then she vanished. They knew what had happened. Her 
tree, miles away, had been cut down. 
For a moment the King's grief and anger were so great that he could not speak. Then he said: 
"Come, friends. We must go up river and find the villains who have done this, with all the speed we may. 
I will leave not one of them alive." 
"Sire, with a good will," said Jewel. 
But Roonwit said, "Sire, be wary in your just wrath. There are strange doings on foot. If there should be 
rebels in arms further up the valley, we three are too few to meet them. If it would please you to wait 
while -" 
"I will not wait the tenth part of a second," said the King. "But while Jewel and I go forward, do you 
gallop as hard as you may to Cair Paravel. Here is my ring for your token. Get me a score of men-at-arms, 
all well mounted, and a score of Talking Dogs, and ten Dwarfs (let them all be fell archers), and a 
Leopard or so, and Stonefoot the Giant. Bring all these after us as quickly as may be." 
"With a good will, Sire," said Roonwit. And at once he turned and galloped Eastward down the valley. 
The King strode on at a great pace, sometimes muttering to himself and sometimes clenching his fists. 
Jewel walked beside him, saying nothing; so there was no sound between them but the faint jingle of a 
rich gold chain that hung round the Unicorn's neck and the noise of two feet and four hoofs. 
They soon reached the River and turned up it where there was a grassy road: they had the water on their 
left and the forest on their right. Soon after that they came to the place where the ground grew rougher 
and thick wood came down to the water's edge. The road, what there was of it, now ran on the Southern 
bank and they had to ford the River to reach it. It was up to Tirian's arm-pits, but Jewel (who had four legs 
and was therefore steadier) kept on his right so as to break the force of the current, and Tirian put his 
strong arm round the Unicorn's strong neck and they both got safely over. The King was still so angry that 

he hardly noticed the cold of the water. But of course he dried his sword very carefully on the shoulder of 
his cloak, which was the only dry part of him, as soon as they came to shore. 
They were now going Westward with the River on their right and Lantern Waste straight ahead of them. 
They had not gone more than a mile when they both stopped and both spoke at the same moment. The 
King said "What have we here?" and Jewel said "Look!" 
"It is a raft," said King Tirian. 
And so it was. Half a dozen splendid tree-trunks, all newly cut and newly lopped of their branches, had 
been lashed together to make a raft, and were gliding swiftly down the river. On the front of the raft there 
was a water rat with a pole to steer it. 
"Hey! Water-Rat! What are you about?" cried the King. 
"Taking logs down to sell to the Calormenes, Sire," said the Rat, touching his ear as he might have 
touched his cap if he had had one. 
"Calormenes!" thundered Tirian. "What do you mean? Who gave order for these trees to be felled?" 
The River flows so swiftly at that time of the year that the raft had already glided past the King and 
Jewel. But the Water-Rat looked back over its shoulder and shouted out: 
"The Lion's orders, Sire. Aslan himself." He added something more but they couldn't hear it. 
The King and the Unicorn stared at one another and both looked more frightened than they had ever been 
in any battle. 
"Aslan," said the King at last, in a very low voice. "Aslan. Could it be true? Could he be felling the holy 
trees and murdering the Dryads?" 

"Unless the Dryads have all done something dreadfully wrong-" murmured Jewel. 
"But selling them to Calormenes!" said the King. "Is it possible?" 
"I don't know," said Jewel miserably. "He's not a tame lion." 
"Well," said the King at last, "we must go on and take the adventure that comes to us." 
"It is the only thing left for us to do, Sire," said the Unicorn. He did not see at the moment how foolish it 
was for two of them to go on alone; nor did the King. They were too angry to think clearly. But much evil 
came of their rashness in the end. 
Suddenly the King leaned hard on his friend's neck and bowed his head. 
"Jewel," he said, "what lies before us? Horrible thoughts arise in my heart. If we had died before today 
we should have been happy." 
"Yes," said Jewel. "We have lived too long. The worst thing in the world has come upon us." They stood 
like that for a minute or two and then went on. 
Before long they could hear the hack-hack-hack of axes falling on timber, though they could see nothing 
yet because there was a rise of the ground in front of them. When they had reached the top of it they could 
see right into Lantern Waste itself. And the King's face turned white when he saw it. 
Right through the middle of that ancient forest - that forest where the trees of gold and of silver had once 
grown and where a child from our world had once planted the Tree of Protection - a broad lane had 
already been opened. It was a hideous lane like a raw gash in the land, full of muddy ruts where felled 
trees had been dragged down to the river. There was a great crowd of people at work, and a cracking of 
whips, and horses tugging and straining as they dragged at the logs. The first thing that struck the King 

and the Unicorn was that about half the people in the crowd were not Talking Beasts but Men. The next 
thing was that these men were not the fair-haired men of Narnia: they were dark, bearded men from 
Calormen, that great and cruel country that lies beyond Archenland across the desert to the south. There 
was no reason, of course, why one should not meet a Calormene or two in Narnia - a merchant or an 
ambassador - for there was peace between Narnia and Calormen in those days. But Tirian could not 
understand why there were so many of them: nor why they were cutting down a Narnian forest. He 
grasped his sword tighter and rolled his cloak round his left arm. They came quickly down among the 
men. 
Two Calormenes were driving a horse which was harnessed to a log. Just as the King reached them the 
log had got stuck in a bad muddy place. 
"Get on, son of sloth! Pull, you lazy pig!" cried the Calormenes, cracking their whips. The horse was 
already straining himself as hard as he could; his eyes were red and he was covered with foam. 
"Work, lazy brute," shouted one of the Calormenes: and as he spoke he struck the horse savagely with his 
whip. It was then that the really dreadful thing happened. 
Up till now Tirian had taken it for granted that the horses which the Calormenes were driving were their 
own horses; dumb, witless animals like the horses of our own world. And though he hated to see even a 
dumb horse overdriven, he was of course thinking more about the murder of the Trees. It had never 
crossed his mind that anyone would dare to harness one of the free Talking Horses of Narnia, much less to 
use a whip on it. But as that savage blow fell the horse reared up and said, half screaming: 
"Fool and tyrant! Do you not see I am doing all I can?" 
When Tirian knew that the Horse was one of his own Narnians, there came over him and over Jewel such 
a rage that they did not know what they were doing. The King's sword went up, the Unicorn's horn went 
down. They rushed forward together. Next moment both the Calormenes lay dead, the one beheaded by 
Tirian's sword and the other gored through the heart by Jewel's horn. 

"MASTER Horse, Master Horse," said Tirian as he hastily cut its traces, "how came these aliens to 
enslave you? Is Narnia conquered? Has there been a battle?" 
"No, Sire," panted the horse, "Aslan is here. It is all by his orders. He has commanded -" 
"'Ware danger, King," said Jewel. Tirian looked up and saw that Calormenes (mixed with a few Talking 
Beasts) were beginning to run towards them from every direction. The two dead men had died without a 
cry and so it had taken a moment before the rest of the crowd knew what had happened. But now they did. 
Most of them had naked scimitars in their hands. 
"Quick. On my back," said Jewel. 
The King flung himself astride of his old friend who turned and galloped away. He changed direction 
twice or thrice as soon as they were out of sight of their enemies, crossed a stream, and shouted without 
slackening his pace, "Whither away, Sire? To Cair Paravel?" 
"Hold hard, friend," said Tirian. "Let me off." He slid off the Unicorn's back and faced him. 
"Jewel," said the King. "We have done a dreadful deed." 
"We were sorely provoked," said Jewel. 
"But to leap on them unawares - without defying them while they were unarmed - faugh! We are two 
murderers, Jewel. I am dishonoured forever." 

Jewel drooped his head. He too was ashamed. 
"And then," said the King, "the Horse said it was by Aslan's orders. The Rat said the same. They all say 
Aslan is here. How if it were true?" 
"But, Sire, how could Aslan be commanding such dreadful things?" 
"He is not a tame lion," said Tirian. "How should we know what he would do? We, who are murderers. 
Jewel, I will go back. I will give up my sword and put myself in the hands of these Calormenes and ask 
that they bring me before Aslan. Let him do justice on me." 
"You will go to your death, then," said Jewel. 
"Do you think I care if Aslan dooms me to death?" said the King. "That would be nothing, nothing at all. 
Would it not be better to be dead than to have this horrible fear that Aslan has come and is not like the 
Aslan we have believed in and longed for? It is as if the sun rose one day and were a black sun." 
"I know," said Jewel. "Or as if you drank water and it were dry water. You are in the right, Sire. This is 
the end of all things. Let us go and give ourselves up." 
"There is no need for both of us to go." 
"If ever we loved one another, let me go with you now," said the Unicorn. "If you are dead and if Aslan 
is not Aslan, what life is left for me?" 
They turned and walked back together, shedding bitter tears. 
As soon as they came to the place where the work was going on the Calormenes raised a cry and came 
towards them with their weapons in hand. But the King held out his sword with the hilt towards them and 

said: 
"I who was King of Narnia and am now a dishonoured knight give myself up to the justice of Aslan. 
Bring me before him." 
"And I give myself up too," said Jewel. 
Then the dark men came round them in a thick crowd, smelling of garlic and onions, their white eyes 
flashing dreadfully in their brown faces. They put a rope halter round Jewel's neck. They took the King's 
sword away and tied his hands behind his back. One of the Calormenes, who had a helmet instead of a 
turban and seemed to be in command, snatched the gold circlet off Tirian's head and hastily put it away 
somewhere among his clothes. They led the two prisoners uphill to a place where there was a big clearing. 
And this was what the prisoners saw. At the centre of the clearing, which was also the highest point 
of the hill, there was a little hut like a stable, with a thatched roof. Its door was shut. On the grass in front 
of the door there sat an Ape. Tirian and Jewel, who had been expecting to see Aslan and had heard 
nothing about an Ape yet, were very bewildered when they saw it. The Ape was of course Shift himself, 
but he looked ten times uglier than when he lived by Caldron Pool, for he was now dress- ed up. He was 
wearing a scarlet jacket which did not fit him very well, having been made for a dwarf. He had Jewelled 
slippers on his hind paws which would not stay on properly because, as you know, the hind paws of an 
Ape are really like hands. He wore what seemed to be a paper crown on his head. There was a great pile 
of nuts beside him and he kept cracking nuts with his jaws and spitting out the shells. And he also kept on 
pulling up the scarlet jacket to scratch himself. A great number of Talking Beasts stood facing him, and 
nearly every face in that crowd looked miserably worried and bewildered. When they saw who the 
prisoners were they all groaned and whimpered. 
"O Lord Shift, mouthpiece of Aslan," said the chief Calormene. "We bring you prisoners. By our skill 
and courage and by the permission of the great god Tash we have taken alive these two desperate 
murderers." 
"Give me that man's sword," said the Ape. So they took the King's sword and handed it, with the swordbelt 
and all, to the monkey. And he hung it round his own neck: and it made him look sillier than ever. 
"We'll see about those two later," said the Ape, spitting out a shell in the direction of the two prisoners. "I 
got some other business first. They can wait. Now listen to me, everyone. The first thing I want to say is 
about nuts. Where's that Head Squirrel got to?" 

"Here, Sir," said a red squirrel, coming forward and making a nervous little bow. 
"Oh you are, are you?" said the Ape with a nasty look. "Now attend to me. I want - I mean, Aslan wants - 
some more nuts. These you've brought aren't anything like enough. You must bring some more, do you 
hear? Twice as many. And they've got to be here by sunset tomorrow, and there mustn't be any bad ones 
or any small ones among them." 
A murmur of dismay ran through the other squirrels, and the Head Squirrel plucked up courage to say: 
"Please, would Aslan himself speak to us about it? If we might be allowed to see him -" 
"Well you won't," said the Ape. "He may be very kind (though it's a lot more than most of you deserve) 
and come out for a few minutes tonight. Then you can all have a look at him. But he will not have you all 
crowding round him and pestering him with questions. Anything you want to say to him will be passed on 
through me: if I think it's worth bothering him about. In the meantime all you squirrels had better go and 
see about the nuts. And make sure they are here by tomorrow evening or, my word! you'll catch it." 
The poor squirrels all scampered away as if a dog were after them. This new order was terrible news for 
them. The nuts they had carefully hoarded for the winter had nearly all been eaten by now; and of the few 
that were left they had already given the Ape far more than they could spare. 
Then a deep voice - it belonged to a great tusked and shaggy Boar - spoke from another part of the 
crowd. 
"But why can't we see Aslan properly and talk to him?" it said. "When he used to appear in Narnia in the 
old days everyone could talk to him face to face." 
"Don't you believe it," said the Ape. "And even if it was true, times have changed. Aslan says he's been 
far too soft with you before, do you see? Well, he isn't going to be soft any more. He's going to lick you 
into shape this time. He'll teach you to think he's a tame lion!" 
A low moaning and whimpering was heard among the Beasts; and, after that, a dead silence which was 

more miserable still. 
"And now there's another thing you got to learn," said the Ape. "I hear some of you are saying I'm an 
Ape. Well, I'm not. I'm a Man. If I look like an Ape, that's because I'm so very old: hundreds and 
hundreds of years old. And it's because I'm so old that I'm so wise. And it's because I'm so wise that I'm 
the only one Aslan is ever going to speak to. He can't be bothered talking to a lot of stupid animals. He'll 
tell me what you've got to do, and I'll tell the rest of you. And take my advice, and see you do it in double 
quick time, for he doesn't mean to stand any nonsense." 
There was a dead silence except for the noise of a very young badger crying and its mother trying to 
make it keep quiet. 
"And now here's another thing," the Ape went on, fitting a fresh nut into its cheek, "I hear some of the 
horses are saying, Let's hurry up and get this job of carting timber over as quickly as we can, and then 
we'll be free again. Well, you can get that idea out of your heads at once. And not only the Horses either. 
Everybody who can work is going to be made to work in future. Aslan has it all settled with the King of 
Calormen - The Tisroc, as our dark faced friends the Calormenes call him. All you Horses and Bulls and 
Donkeys are to be sent down into Calormen to work for your living - pulling and carrying the way horses 
and such-like do in other countries. And all you digging animals like Moles and Rabbits and Dwarfs are 
going down to work in The Tisroc's mines. And -" 
"No, no, no," howled the Beasts. "It can't be true. Aslan would never sell us into slavery to the King of 
Calormen." 
"None of that! Hold your noise!" said the Ape with a snarl. "Who said anything about slavery? You won't 
be slaves. You'll be paid - very good wages too. That is to say, your pay will be paid into Aslan's treasury 
and he will use it all for everybody's good." Then he glanced, and almost winked, at the chief Calormene. 
The Calormene bowed and replied, in the pompous Calormene way: 
"Most sapient Mouthpiece of Aslan, The Tisroc (may he-live-forever) is wholly of one mind with your 
lordship in this judicious plan." 
"There! You see!" said the Ape. "It's all arranged. And all for your own good. We'll be able, with the 
money you earn, to make Narnia a country worth living in. There'll be oranges and bananas pouring in - 
and roads and big cities and schools and offices and whips and muzzles and saddles and cages and 
kennels and prisons - Oh, everything." 

"But we don't want all those things," said an old Bear. "We want to be free. And we want to hear Aslan 
speak himself." 
"Now don't you start arguing," said the Ape, "for it's a thing I won't stand. I'm a Man: you're only a fat, 
stupid old Bear. What do you know about freedom? You think freedom means doing what you like. Well, 
you're wrong. That isn't true freedom. True freedom means doing what I tell you." 
"H-n-n-h," grunted the Bear and scratched its head; it found this sort of thing hard to understand. 
"Please, please," said the high voice of a woolly lamb, who was so young that everyone was surprised he 
dared to speak at all. 
"What is it now?" said the Ape. "Be quick." 
"Please," said the Lamb, "I can't understand. What have we to do with the Calormenes? We belong to 
Aslan. They belong to Tash. They have a god called Tash. They say he has four arms and the head of a 
vulture. They kill Men on his altar. I don't believe there's any such person as Tash. But if there was, how 
could Aslan be friends with him?" 
All the animals cocked their heads sideways and all their bright eyes flashed towards the Ape. They knew 
it was the best question anyone had asked yet. 
The Ape jumped up and spat at the Lamb. 
"Baby!" he hissed. "Silly little bleater! Go home to your mother and drink milk. What do you understand 
of such things? But the others, listen. Tash is only another name for Aslan. All that old idea of us being 
right and the Calormenes wrong is silly. We know better now. The Calormenes use different words but 
we all mean the same thing. Tash and Aslan are only two different names for you know Who. That's why 
there can never be any quarrel between them. Get that into your heads, you stupid brutes. Tash is Aslan: 
Aslan is Tash." 

You know how sad your own dog's face can look sometimes. Think of that and then think of all the faces 
of those Talking Beasts - all those honest, humble, bewildered Birds, Bears, Badgers, Rabbits, Moles, and 
Mice - all far sadder than that. Every tail was down, every whisker drooped. It would have broken your 
heart with very pity to see their faces. There was only one who did not look at all unhappy. 
It was a ginger Cat - a great big Tom in the prime of life - who sat bolt upright with his tail curled round 
his toes, in the very front row of all the Beasts. He had been staring hard at the Ape and the Calormene 
captain all the time and had never once blinked his eyes. 
"Excuse me," said the Cat very politely, "but this interests me. Does your friend from Calormen say the 
same?" 
"Assuredly," said the Calormene. "The enlightened Ape - Man, I mean - is in the right. Aslan means 
neither less nor more than Tash." 
"Especially, Aslan means no more than Tash?" suggested the Cat. 
"No more at all," said the Calormene, looking the Cat straight in the face. 
"Is that good enough for you, Ginger?" said the Ape. 
"Oh certainly," said Ginger coolly. "Thank you very much. I only wanted to be quite clear. I think I am 
beginning to understand." 
Up till now the King and Jewel had said nothing: they were waiting until the Ape should bid them speak, 
for they thought it was no use interrupting. But now, as Tirian looked round on the miserable faces of the 
Narnians, and saw how they would all believe that Aslan and Tash were one and the same, he could bear 
it no longer. 
"Ape," he cried with a great voice, "you lie damnably. You lie like a Calormene. You lie like an Ape." 

He meant to go on and ask how the terrible god Tash who fed on the blood of his people could possibly 
be the same as the good Lion by whose blood all Narnia was saved. If he had been allowed to speak, the 
rule of the Ape might have ended that day; the Beasts might have seen the truth and thrown the Ape 
down. But before he could say another word two Calormenes struck him in the mouth with all their force, 
and a third, from behind, kicked his feet from under him. And as he fell, the Ape squealed in rage and 
terror. 
"Take him away. Take him away. Take him where he cannot hear us, nor we hear him. There tie him to a 
tree. I will - I mean, Aslan will - do justice on him later." 
THE King was so dizzy from being knocked down that he hardly knew what was happening until the 
Calormenes untied his wrists and put his arms straight down by his sides and set him with his back against 
an ash tree. Then they bound ropes round his ankles and his knees and his waist and his chest and left him 
there. What worried him worst at the moment - for it is often little things that are hardest to stand - was 
that his lip was bleeding where they had hit him and he couldn't wipe the little trickle of blood away 
although it tickled him. 
From where he was he could still see the little stable on the top of the hill and the Ape sitting in front of 
it. He could just hear the Ape's voice still going on and, every now and then, some answer from the 
crowd, but he could not make out the words. 
"I wonder what they've done to Jewel," thought the King. 
Presently the crowd of beasts broke up and began going away in different directions. Some passed close 
to Tirian. They looked at him as if they were both frightened and sorry to see him tied up but none of 
them spoke. Soon they had all gone and there was silence in the wood. Then hours and hours went past 
and Tirian became first very thirsty and then very hungry; and as the afternoon dragged on and turned into 
evening, he became cold too. His back was very sore. The sun went down and it began to be twilight. 

When it was almost dark Tirian heard a light pitter-patter of feet and saw some small creatures coming 
towards him. The three on the left were Mice, and there was a Rabbit in the middle: on the right were two 
Moles. Both these were carrying little bags on their backs which gave them a curious look in the dark so 
that at first he wondered what kind of beasts they were. Then, in a moment, they were all standing up on 
their hind legs, laying their cool paws on his knees and giving his knees snuffly animal kisses. (They 
could reach his knees because Narnian Talking Beasts of that sort are bigger than the dumb beasts of the 
same kind in England.) 
"Lord King! dear Lord King," said their shrill voices, "we are so sorry for you. We daren't untie you 
because Aslan might be angry with us. But we've brought you your supper." 
At once the first Mouse climbed nimbly up till he was perched on the rope that bound Tirian's chest and 
was wrinkling his blunt nose in front of Tirian's face. Then the second Mouse climbed up and hung on 
just below the first Mouse. The other beasts stood on the ground and began handing things up. 
"Drink, Sire, and then you'll find you are able to eat," said the topmost Mouse, and Tirian found that a 
little wooden cup was being held to his lips. It was only the size of an egg cup so that he had hardly tasted 
the wine in it before it was empty. But then the Mouse passed it down and the others re-filled it and it was 
passed up again and Tirian emptied it a second time. In this way they went on till he had quite a good 
drink, which was all the better for coming in little doses, for that is more thirst-quenching than one long 
draught. 
"Here is cheese, Sire," said the first Mouse, "but not very much, for fear it would make you too thirsty." 
And after the cheese they fed him with oat-cakes and fresh butter, and then with some more wine. 
"Now hand up the water," said the first Mouse, "and I'll wash the King's face. There is blood on it." 
Then Tirian felt something like a tiny sponge dabbing his face, and it was most refreshing. 
"Little friends," said Tirian, "how can I thank you for all this?" 

"You needn't, you needn't," said the little voices. "What else could we do? We don't want any other King. 
We're your people. If it was only the Ape and the Calormenes who were against you we would have 
fought till we were cut into pieces before we'd let them tie you up. We would, we would indeed. But we 
can't go against Aslan." 
"Do you think it really is Aslan?" asked the King. 
"Oh yes, yes," said the Rabbit. "He came out of the stable last night. We all saw him." 
"What was he like?" said the King. 
"Like a terrible, great Lion, to be sure," said one of the Mice. 
"And you think it is really Aslan who is killing the Wood-Nymphs and making you all slaves to the King 
of Calormen?" 
"Ah, that's bad, isn't it?" said the second Mouse. "It would have been better if we'd died before all this 
began. But there's no doubt about it. Everyone says it is Aslan's orders. And we've seen him. We didn't 
think Aslan would be like that. Why, we - we wanted him to come back to Narnia." 
"He seems to have come back very angry this time," said the first Mouse. "We must all have done 
something dreadfully wrong without knowing it. He must be punishing us for something. But I do think 
we might be told what it was!" 
"I suppose what we're doing now may be wrong," said the Rabbit. 
"I don't care if it is," said one of the Moles. "I'd do it again." 
But the others said, "Oh hush," and "Do be careful," and then they all said, "We're sorry, dear King, but 
we must go back now. It would never do for us to be caught here." 

"Leave me at once, dear Beasts," said Tirian. "I would not for all Narnia bring any of you into danger." 
"Goodnight, goodnight," said the Beasts, rubbing their noses against his knees. "We will come back - if 
we can." Then they all pattered away and the wood seemed darker and colder and lonelier than it had been 
before they came. 
The stars came out and time went slowly on - imagine how slowly - while that last King of Narnia stood 
stiff and sore and upright against the tree in his bonds. But at last something happened. 
Far away there appeared a red light. Then it disappeared for a moment and came back again, bigger and 
stronger. Then he could see dark shapes going to and fro on this side of the light and carrying bundles and 
throwing them down. He knew now what he was looking at. It was a bonfire, newly lit, and people were 
throwing bundles of brushwood on to it. Presently it blazed up and Tirian could see that it was on the very 
top of the hill. He could see quite clearly the stable behind it, all lit up in the red glow, and a great crowd 
of Beasts and Men between the fire and himself. A small figure, hunched up beside the fire, must be the 
Ape. It was saying something to the crowd, but he could not hear what. Then it went and bowed three 
times to the ground in front of the door of the stable. Then it got up and opened the door. And something 
on four legs - something that walked rather stiffly - came out of the stable and stood facing the crowd. 
A great wailing or howling went up, so loud that Tirian could hear some of the words. 
"Aslan! Aslan! Aslan!" cried the Beasts. "Speak to us. Comfort us. Be angry with us no more." 
From where Tirian was he could not make out very clearly what the thing was; but he could see that it 
was yellow and hairy. He had never seen the Great Lion. He had never seen a common lion. He couldn't 
be sure that what he saw was not the real Aslan. He had not expected Aslan to look like that stiff thing 
which stood and said nothing. But how could one be sure? For a moment horrible thoughts went through 
his mind: then he remembered the nonsense about Tash and Aslan being the same and knew that the 
whole thing must be a cheat. 
The Ape put his head close up to the yellow thing's head as if he were listening to something it was 
whispering to him. Then he turned and spoke to the crowd, and the crowd wailed again. Then the yellow 
thing turned clumsily round and walked - you might almost say, waddled - back into the stable and the 

Ape shut the door behind it. After that the fire must have been put out for the light vanished quite 
suddenly, and Tirian was once more alone with the cold and the darkness. 
He thought of other Kings who had lived and died in Narnia in old times and it seemed to him that none 
of them had ever been so unlucky as himself. He thought of his great-grandfather's great-grandfather King 
Rilian who had been stolen away by a Witch when he was only a young prince and kept hidden for years 
in the dark caves beneath the land of the Northern Giants. But then it had all come; right in the end, for 
two mysterious children had suddenly appeared from the land beyond the world's end and had rescued 
him so that he came home to Narnia and had a long and prosperous reign. "It's not like that with me," said 
Tirian to himself. Then he went further back and: thought about Rilian's father, Caspian the Seafarer, 
whose wicked uncle King Miraz had tried to murder him and how Caspian had fled away into the woods 
and lived among the Dwarfs. But that story too had all come right in the end: for Caspian also had been 
helped by children - only there were four of them that time - who came from somewhere beyond the 
world and fought a great battle and set him on his father's throne. "But it was all long ago," said Tirian to 
himself. "That sort of thing doesn't happen now." And then he remembered (for he had always been good 
at history when he was a boy) how those same four children who had helped Caspian had been in Narnia 
over a thousand years before; and it was then that they had done the most remarkable thing of all. For then 
they had defeated the terrible White Witch and ended the Hundred Years of Winter, and after that they 
had reigned (all four of them together) at Cair Paravel, till they were no longer children but great Kings 
and lovely Queens, and their reign had been the golden age of Narnia. And Aslan had come into that story 
a lot. He had come into all the other stories too, as Tirian now remembered. "Aslan - and children from 
another world," thought Tirian. "They have always come in when things were at their worst. Oh, if only 
they could now." 
And he called out "Aslan! Aslan! Aslan! Come and help us now." 
But the darkness and the cold and the quietness went on just the same. 
"Let me be killed," cried the King. "I ask nothing for myself. But come and save all Narnia." 
And still there was no change in the night or the wood, but there began to be a kind of change inside 
Tirian. Without knowing why, he began to feel a faint hope. And he felt somehow stronger. "Oh Aslan, 
Aslan," he whispered. "If you will not come yourself, at least send me the helpers from beyond the world. 
Or let me call them. Let my voice carry beyond the world." Then, hardly knowing that he was doing it, he 
suddenly cried out in a great voice: 
"Children! Children! Friends of Narnia! Quick. Come to me. Across the worlds I call you; I Tirian, King 
of Narnia, Lord of Cair Paravel, and Emperor of the Lone Islands!" 

And immediately he was plunged into a dream (if it was a dream) more vivid than any he had had in his 
life. 
He seemed to be standing in a lighted room where seven people sat round a table. It looked as if they had 
just finished their meal. Two of those people were very old, an old man with a white beard and an old 
woman with wise, merry, twinkling eyes. He who sat at the right hand of the old man was hardly full 
grown, certainly younger than Tirian himself, but his face had already the look of a king and a warrior. 
And you could almost say the same of the other youth who sat at the right hand of the old woman. Facing 
Tirian across the table sat a fair-haired girl younger than either of these, and on either side of her a boy 
and girl who were younger still. They were all dressed in what seemed to Tirian the oddest kind of 
clothes. 
But he had no time to think about details like that, for instantly the younger boy and both the girls started 
to their feet, and one of them gave a little scream. The old woman started and drew in her breath sharply. 
The old man must have made some sudden movement too for the wine glass which stood at his right hand 
was swept off the table: Tirian could hear the tinkling noise as it broke on the floor. 
Then Tirian realized that these people could see him; they were staring at him as if they saw a ghost. But 
he noticed that the king-like one who sat at the old man's right never moved (though he turned pale) 
except that he clenched his hand very tight. Then he said: 
"Speak, if you're not a phantom or a dream. You have a Narnian look about you and we are the seven 
friends of Narnia." 
Tirian was longing to speak, and he tried to cry out aloud that he was Tirian of Narnia, in great need of 
help. But he found (as I have sometimes found in dreams too) that his voice made no noise at all. 
The one who had already spoken to him rose to his feet. "Shadow or spirit or whatever you are," he said, 
fixing his eyes full upon Tirian. "If you are from Narnia, I charge you in the name of Aslan, speak to me. I 
am Peter the High King." 
The room began to swim before Tirian's eyes. He heard the voices of those seven people all speaking at 
once, and all getting fainter every second, and they were saying things like, "Look! It's fading." "It's 

melting away." "It's vanishing." Next moment he was wide awake, still tied to the tree, colder and stiffer 
than ever. The wood was full of the pale, dreary light that comes before sunrise, and he was soaking wet 
with dew; it was nearly morning. 
That waking was about the worst moment he had ever had in his life. 
Bur his misery did not last long. Almost at once there came a bump, and then a second bump, and two 
children were standing before him. The wood in front of him had been quite empty a second before and he 
knew they had not come from behind his tree, for he would have heard them. They had in fact simply 
appeared from nowhere. He saw at a glance that they were wearing the same queer, dingy sort of clothes 
as the people in his dream; and he saw, at a second glance, that they were the youngest boy and girl out of 
that party of seven. 
"Gosh!" said the boy, "that took one's breath away! I thought -" 
"Hurry up and get him untied," said the girl. "We can talk, afterwards." Then she added, turning to Tirian, 
"I'm sorry we've been so long. We came the moment we could." 
While she was speaking the Boy produced a knife from his pocket and was quickly cutting the King's 
bonds: too quickly, in fact, for the King was so stiff and numb that when the last cord was cut he fell 
forward on his hands and knees. He couldn't get up again till he had brought some life back into his legs 
by a good rubbing. 
"I say," said the girl. "It was you, wasn't it, who appeared to us that night when we were all at supper? 
Nearly a week ago." 

"A week, fair maid?" said Tirian. "My dream led me into your world scarce ten minutes since." 
"It's the usual muddle about times, Pole," said the Boy. 
"I remember now," said Tirian. "That too comes in all the old tales. The time of your strange land is 
different from ours. But if we speak of Time, 'tis time to be gone from here: for my enemies are close at 
hand. Will you come with me?" 
"Of course," said the girl. "It's you we've come to help." 
Tirian got to his feet and led them rapidly down hill, Southward and away from the stable. He knew 
where he meant to go but his first aim was to get to rocky places where they would leave no trail, and his 
second to cross some water so that they would leave no scent. This took them about an hour's scrambling 
and wading and while that was going on nobody had any breath to talk. But even so, Tirian kept on 
stealing glances at his companions. The wonder of walking beside the creatures from another world made 
him feel a little dizzy: but it also made all the old stories seem far more real than they had ever seemed 
before . . . anything might happen now. 
"Now," said Tirian as they came to the head of a little valley which ran down before them among young 
birch trees, "we are out of danger of those villains for a space and may walk more easily." The sun had 
risen, dew-drops were twinkling on every branch, and birds were singing. 
"What about some grub? - I mean for you, Sir, we two have had our breakfast," said the Boy. 
Tirian wondered very much what he meant by "grub", but when the Boy opened a bulgy satchel which he 
was carrying and pulled out a rather greasy and squashy packet, he understood. He was ravenously 
hungry, though he hadn't thought about it till that moment. There were two hard-boiled egg sandwiches, 
and two cheese sandwiches, and two with some kind of paste in them. If he hadn't been so hungry he 
wouldn't have thought much of the paste, for that is a sort of food nobody eats in Narnia. By the time he 

had eaten all six sandwiches they had come to the bottom of the valley and there they found a mossy cliff 
with a little fountain bubbling out of it. All three stopped and drank and splashed their hot faces. 
"And now," said the girl as she tossed her wet hair back from her forehead, "aren't you going to tell us 
who you are and why you were tied up and what it's all about?" 
"With a good will, damsel," said Tirian. "But we must keep on the march." So while they went on 
walking he told them who he was and all the things that had happened to him. "And now," he said at the 
end, "I am going to a certain tower, one of three that were built in my grandsire's time to guard Lantern 
Waste against certain perilous outlaws who dwelled there in his day. By Aslan's good will I was not 
robbed of my keys. In that tower we shall find stores of weapons and mail and some victuals also, though 
no better than dry biscuit. There also we can lie safe while we make our plans. And now, prithee, tell me 
who you two are and all your story." 
"I'm Eustace Scrubb and this is Jill Pole," said the Boy. "And we were here once before, ages and ages 
ago, more than a year ago by our time, and there was a chap called Prince Rilian, and they were keeping 
this chap underground, and Puddleglum put his foot in -" 
"Ha!" cried Tirian, "are you then that Eustace and that Jill who rescued King Rilian from his long 
enchantment?" 
"Yes, that's us," said Jill. "So he's King Rilian now, is he? Oh of course he would be. I forgot-" 
"Nay," said Tirian, "I am the seventh in descent from him. He has been dead over two hundred years." 
Jill made a face. "Ugh!" she said. "That's the horrid part about coming back to Narnia." But Eustace went 
on. 
"Well now you know who we are, Sire," he said. "And it was like this. The Professor and Aunt Polly had 
got all us friends of Narnia together -" 
"I know not these names, Eustace," said Tirian. 

"They're the two who came into Narnia at the very beginning, the day all the animals learned to talk." 
"By the Lion's Mane," cried Tirian. "Those two! The Lord Digory and the Lady Polly! From the dawn of 
the world! And still in your place? The wonder and the glory of it! But tell me, tell me." 
"She isn't really our aunt, you know," said Eustace. "She's Miss Plummer, but we call her Aunt Polly. 
Well those two got us all together partly just for fun, so that we could all have a good jaw about Narnia 
(for of course there's no one else we can ever talk to about things like that) but partly because the 
Professor had a feeling that we were somehow wanted over here. Well then you came in like a ghost or 
goodness-knows-what and nearly frightened the lives out of us and vanished without saying a word. After 
that, we knew for certain there was something up. 
The next question was how to get here. You can't go just by wanting to. So we talked and talked and at 
last the Professor said the only way would be by the Magic Rings. It was by those Rings that he and Aunt 
Polly got here long, long ago when they were only kids, years before we younger ones were born. But the 
Rings had all been buried in the garden of a house in London (that's our big town, Sire) and the house had 
been sold. So then the problem was how to get at them. You'll never guess what we did in the end! Peter 
and Edmund - that's the High King Peter, the one who spoke to you - went up to London to get into the 
garden from the back, early in the morning before people were up. They were dressed like workmen so 
that if anyone did see them it would look as if they'd come to do something about the drains. I wish I'd 
been with them: it must have been glorious fun. And they must have succeeded for next day Peter sent us 
a wire - that's a sort of message, Sire, I'll explain about it some other time - to say he'd got the Rings. And 
the day after that was the day Pole and I had to go back to school - we're the only two who are still at 
school and we're at the same one. So Peter and Edmund were to meet us at a place on the way down to 
school and hand over the Rings. It had to be us two who were to go to Narnia, you see, because the older 
ones couldn't come again. So we got into the train that's a kind of thing people travel in in our world: a lot 
of wagons chained together - and the Professor and Aunt Polly and Lucy came with us. We wanted to 
keep together as long as we could. Well there we were in the train. And we were just getting to the station 
where the others were to meet us, and I was looking out of the window to see if I could see them when 
suddenly there came a most frightful jerk and a noise: and there we were in Narnia and there was your 
Majesty tied up to the tree." 
"So you never used the Rings?" said Tirian. 
"No," said Eustace. "Never even saw them. Aslan did it all for us in his own way without any Rings." 

"But the High King Peter has them," said Tirian. 
"Yes," said Jill. "But we don't think he can use them. When the two other Pevensies - King Edmund and 
Queen Lucy - were last here, Aslan said they would never come to Narnia again. And he said something 
of the same sort to the High King, only longer ago. You may be sure he'll come like a shot if he's 
allowed." 
"Gosh!" said Eustace. "It's getting hot in this sun. Are we nearly there, Sire?" 
"Look," said Tirian and pointed. Not many yards away grey battlements rose above the tree-tops, and 
after a minute's more walking they came out in an open grassy space. A stream ran across it and on the far 
side of the stream stood a squat, square tower with very few and narrow windows and one heavy-looking 
door in the wall that faced them. 
Tirian looked sharply this way and that to make sure that no enemies were in sight. Then he walked up to 
the tower and stood still for a moment fishing up his bunch of keys which he wore inside his huntingdress 
on a narrow silver chain that went round his neck. It was a nice bunch of keys that he brought out, 
for two were golden and many were richly ornamented: you could see at once that they were keys made 
for opening solemn and secret rooms in palaces, or chests and caskets of sweet-smelling wood that 
contained royal treasures. But the key which he now put into the lock of the door was big and plain and 
more rudely made. The lock was stiff and for a moment Tirian began to be afraid that he would not be 
able to turn it: but at last he did and the door swung open with a sullen creak. 
"Welcome friends," said Tirian. "I fear this is the best palace that the King of Narnia can now offer to his 
guests." 
Tirian was pleased to see that the two strangers had been well brought up. They both said not to mention 
it and that they were sure it would be very nice. 
As a matter of fact it was not particularly nice. It was rather dark and smelled very damp. There was only 
one room in it and this room went right up to the stone roof: a wooden staircase in one corner led up to a 
trap door by which you could get out on the battlements. There were a few rude bunks to sleep in, and a 
great many lockers and bundles. There was also a hearth which looked as if nobody had lit a fire in it for a 
great many years. 

"We'd better go out and gather some firewood first thing, hadn't we?" said Jill. 
"Not yet, comrade," said Tirian. He was determined that they should not be caught unarmed, and began 
searching the lockers, thankfully remembering that he had always been careful to have these garrison 
towers inspected once a year and to make sure that they were stocked with all things needful. The bow 
strings were there in their coverings of oiled silk, the swords and spears were greased against rust, and the 
armour was kept bright in its wrappings. But there was something even better. "Look you!" said Tirian as 
he drew out a long mail shirt of a curious pattern and flashed it before the children's eyes. 
"That's funny-looking mail, Sire," said Eustace. 
"Aye, lad," said Tirian. "No Narnian Dwarf smithied that. 'Tis mail of Calormen, outlandish gear. I have 
ever kept a few suits of it in readiness, for I never knew when I or my friends might have reason to walk 
unseen in The Tisroc's land. And look on this stone bottle. In this there is a juice which, when we have 
rubbed it on our hands and faces, will make us brown as Calormenes." 
"Oh hurrah!" said Jill. "Disguise! I love disguises." 
Tirian showed them how to pour out a little of the juice into the palms of their hands and then rub it well 
over their faces and necks, right down to the shoulders, and then on their hands, right up to the elbows. He 
did the same himself. 
"After this has hardened on us," he said, "we may wash in water and it will not change. Nothing but oil 
and ashes will make us white Narnians again. And now, sweet Jill, let us go see how this mail shirt 
becomes you. 'Tis something too long, yet not so much as I feared. Doubtless it belonged to a page in the 
train of one of their Tarkaans." 
After the mail shirts they put on Calormene helmets, which are little round ones fitting tight to the head 
and having a spike on top. Then Tirian took long rolls of some white stuff out of the locker and wound 
them over the helmets till they became turbans: but the little steel spike still stuck up in the middle. He 
and Eustace took curved Calormene swords and little round shields. There was no sword light enough for 
Jill, but he gave her a long, straight hunting knife which might do for a sword at a pinch. 

"Hast any skill with the bow, maiden?" said Tirian. 
"Nothing worth talking of," said Jill, blushing. "Scrubb's not bad." 
"Don't you believe her, Sire," said Eustace. "We've both been practising archery ever since we got back 
from Narnia last time, and she's about as good as me now. Not that either of us is much." 
Then Tirian gave Jill a bow and a quiver full of arrows. The next business was to light a fire, for inside 
that tower it still felt more like a cave than like anything indoors and set one shivering. But they got warm 
gathering wood - the sun was now at its highest - and once the blaze was roaring up the chimney the place 
began to look cheerful. Dinner was, however, a dull meal, for the best they could do was to pound up 
some of the hard biscuit which they found in a locker and pour it into boiling water, with salt, so as to 
make a kind of porridge. And of course there was nothing to drink but water. 
"I wish we'd brought a packet of tea," said Jill. 
"Or a tin of cocoa," said Eustace. 
"A firkin or so of good wine in each of these towers would not have been amiss," said Tirian. 
ABOUT four hours later Tirian flung himself into one of the bunks to snatch a little sleep. The two 
children were already snoring: he had made them go to bed before he did because they would have to be 
up most of the night and he knew that at their age they couldn't do without sleep. Also, he had tired them 
out. First he had given Jill some practice in archery and found that, though not up to Narnian standards, 
she was really not too bad. Indeed she had succeeded in shooting a rabbit (not a Talking rabbit, of course: 
there are lots of the ordinary kind about in Western Narnia) and it was already skinned, cleaned, and 

hanging up. He had found that both the children knew all about this chilly and smelly job; they had 
learned that kind of thing on their great journey through Giant-Land in the days of Prince Rilian. Then he 
had tried to teach Eustace how to use his sword and shield. Eustace had learned quite a lot about sword 
fighting on his earlier adventures but that had been all with a straight Narnian sword. He had never 
handled a curved Calormene scimitar and that made it hard, for many of the strokes are quite different and 
some of the habits he had learned with the long sword had now to be unlearned again. But Tirian found 
that he had a good eye and was very quick on his feet. He was surprised at the strength of both children: 
in fact they both seemed to be already much stronger and bigger and more grown-up than they had been 
when he first met them a few hours ago. It is one of the effects which Narnian air often has on visitors 
from our world. 
All three of them agreed that the very first thing they must do was to go back to Stable Hill and try to 
rescue Jewel the Unicorn. After that, if they succeeded, they would try to get away Eastward and meet the 
little army which Roonwit the Centaur would be bringing from Cair Paravel. 
An experienced warrior and huntsman like Tirian can always wake up at the time he wants. So he gave 
himself till nine o'clock that night and then put all worries out of his head and fell asleep at once. It 
seemed only a moment later when he woke but he knew by the light and the very feel of things that he had 
timed his sleep exactly. He got up, put on his helmet-and-turban (he had slept in his mail shirt), and then 
shook the other two till they woke up. They looked, to tell the truth, very grey and dismal as they climbed 
out of their bunks and there was a good deal of yawning. 
"Now," said Tirian, "we go due North from here - by good fortune 'tis a starry night - and it will be much 
shorter than our journey this morning, for then we went round-about but now we shall go straight. If we 
are challenged, then do you two hold your peace and I will do my best to talk like a curst, cruel, proud 
lord of Calormen. If I draw my sword then thou, Eustace, must do likewise and let Jill leap behind us and 
stand with an arrow on the string. But if I cry `Home', then fly for the Tower both of you. And let none try 
to fight on - not even one stroke after I have given the retreat: such false valour has spoiled many notable 
plans in the wars. And now, friends, in the name of Aslan let us go forward." 
Out they went into the cold night. All the great Northern stars were burning above the tree-tops. The 
North-Star of that world is called the Spear-Head: it is brighter than our Pole Star. 
For a time they could go straight towards the Spear-Head but presently they came to a dense thicket so 
that they had to go out of their course to get round it. And after that -for they were still overshadowed by 
branches - it was hard to pick up their bearings. It was Jill who set them right again: she had been an 

excellent Guide in England. And of course she knew her Narnian stars perfectly, having travelled so much 
in the wild Northern Lands, and could work out the direction from other stars even when the Spear-Head 
was hidden. As soon as Tirian saw that she was the best pathfinder of the three of them he put her in front. 
And then he was astonished to find how silently and almost invisibly she glided on before them. 
"By the Mane!" he whispered to Eustace. "This girl is a wondrous wood-maid. If she had Dryad's blood 
in her she could scarce do it better." 
"She's so small, that's what helps," whispered Eustace. But Jill from in front said: "S-s-s-h, less noise." 
All round them the wood was very quiet. Indeed it was far too quiet. On an ordinary Narnia night there 
ought to have been noises - an occasional cheery "Goodnight" from a Hedgehog, the cry of an Owl 
overhead, perhaps a flute in the distance to tell of Fauns dancing, or some throbbing, hammering noises 
from Dwarfs underground. All that was silenced: gloom and fear reigned over Narnia. 
After a time they began to go steeply uphill and the trees grew further apart. Tirian could dimly make out 
the wellknown hill-top and the stable. Jill was now going with more and more caution: she kept on 
making signs to the others with her hand to do the same. Then she stopped dead still and Tirian saw her 
gradually sink down into the grass and disappear without a sound. A moment later she rose again, put her 
mouth close to Tirian's ear, and said in the lowest possible whisper, "Get down. Thee better." She said 
thee for see not because she had a lisp but because she knew the hissing letter S is the part of a whisper 
most likely to be overheard. Tirian at once lay down, almost as silently as Jill, but not quite, for he was 
heavier and older. And once they were down, he saw how from that position you could see the edge of the 
hill sharp against the star-strewn sky. Two black shapes rose against it: one was the stable, and the other, a 
few feet in front of it, was a Calormene sentry. He was keeping very ill watch: not walking or even 
standing but sitting with his spear over his shoulder and his chin on his chest. "Well done," said Tirian to 
Jill. She had shown him exactly what he needed to know. 
They got up and Tirian now took the lead. Very slowly, hardly daring to breathe, they made their way up 
to a little clump of trees which was not more than forty feet away from the sentinel. 
"Wait here till I come again," he whispered to the other two. "If I miscarry, fly." Then he sauntered out 
boldly in full view of the enemy. The man started when he saw him and was just going to jump to his feet: 
he was afraid Tirian might be one of his own officers and that he would get into trouble for sitting down. 
But before he could get up Tirian had dropped on one knee beside him, saying: 

"Art thou a warrior of the Tisroc's, may he live for ever? It cheers my heart to meet thee among all these 
beasts and devils of Narnians. Give me thy hand, friend." 
Before he well knew what was happening the Calormene sentry found his right hand seized in a mighty 
grip. Next instant someone was kneeling on his legs and a dagger was pressed against his neck. 
"One noise and thou art dead," said Tirian in his ear. "Tell me where the Unicorn is and thou shalt live." 
"B - behind the stable, O My Master," stammered the unfortunate man. 
"Good. Rise up and lead me to him." 
As the man got up the point of the dagger never left his neck. It only travelled round (cold and rather 
ticklish) as Tirian got behind him and settled it at a convenient place under his ear. Trembling he went 
round to the back of the stable. 
Though it was dark Tirian could see the white shape of Jewel at once. 
"Hush!" he said. "No, do not neigh. Yes, Jewel, it is I. How have they tied thee?" 
"Hobbled by all four legs and tied with a bridle to a ring in the stable wall," came Jewel's voice. 
"Stand here, sentry, with your back to the wall. So. Now, Jewel: set the point of your horn against this 
Calormene's breast." 
"With a good will, Sire," said Jewel. 
"If he moves, rive him to the heart." Then in a few seconds Tirian cut the ropes. With the remains of 

them he bound the sentry hand and foot. Finally he made him open his mouth, stuffed it full of grass and 
tied him up from scalp to chin so that he could make no noise, lowered the man into a sitting position and 
set him against the wall. 
"I have done thee some discourtesy, soldier," said Tirian. "But such was my need. If we meet again I may 
happen to do thee a better turn. Now, Jewel, let us go softly." 
He put his left arm round the beast's neck and bent and kissed its nose and both had great joy. They went 
back as quietly as possible to the place where he had left the children. It was darker in there under the 
trees and he nearly ran into Eustace before he saw him. 
"All's well," whispered Tirian. "A good night's work. Now for home." 
They turned and had gone a few paces when Eustace said, "Where are you, Pole?" There was no answer. 
"Is Jill on the other side of you, Sire?" he asked. 
"What?" said Tirian. "Is she not on the other side of your" 
It was a terrible moment. They dared not shout but they whispered her name in the loudest whisper they 
could manage. There was no reply. 
"Did she go from you while I was away?" asked Tirian. 
"I didn't see or hear her go," said Eustace. "But she could have gone without my knowing. She can be as 
quiet as a cat; you've seen for yourself." 
At that moment a far off drum beat was heard. Jewel moved his ears forward. "Dwarfs," he said. 
"And treacherous Dwarfs, enemies, as likely as not," muttered Tirian. 

"And here comes something on hoofs, much nearer," said Jewel. 
The two humans and the Unicorn stood dead still. There were now so many different things to worry 
about that they didn't know what to do. The noise of hoofs came steadily nearer. And then, quite close to 
them, a voice whispered: 
"Hallo! Are you all there?" 
Thank heaven, it was Jill's. 
"Where the devil have you been to?" said Eustace in a furious whisper, for he had been very frightened. 
"In the stable," gasped Jill, but it was the sort of gasp you give when you're struggling with suppressed 
laughter. 
"Oh," growled Eustace, "you think it funny, do you? Well all I can say is -" 
"Have you got Jewel, Sire?" asked Jill. 
"Yes. Here he is. What is that beast with you?" 
"That's him," said Jill. "But let's be off home before anyone wakes up." And again there came little 
explosions of laughter. 
The others obeyed at once for they had already lingered long enough in that dangerous place and the 
Dwarf drums seemed to have come a little nearer. It was only after they had been walking Southward for 
several minutes that Eustace said: 

"Got him? What do you mean?" 
"The false Aslan," said Jill. 
"What?" said Tirian. "Where have you been? What have you done?" 
"Well, Sire," said Jill. "As soon as I saw that you'd got the sentry out of the way I thought hadn't I better 
have a look inside the stable and see what really is there? So I crawled along. It was as easy as anything to 
draw the bolt. 
Of course it was pitch black inside and smelled like any other stable. Then I struck a light and - would 
you believe it? - there was nothing at all there but this old donkey with a bundle of lion-skin tied on to his 
back. So I drew my knife and told him he'd have to come along with me. As a matter of fact I needn't have 
threatened him with the knife at all. He was very fed up with the stable and quite ready to come - weren't 
you, Puzzle dear?" 
"Great Scott!" said Eustace. "Well I'm - jiggered. I was jolly angry with you a moment ago, and I still 
think it was mean of you to sneak off without the rest of us: but I must admit - well, I mean to say - well it 
was a perfectly gorgeous thing to do. If she was a boy she'd have to be knighted, wouldn't she, Sire?" 
"If she was a boy," said Tirian, "she'd be whipped for disobeying orders." And in the dark no one could 
see whether he said this with a frown or a smile. Next minute there was a sound of rasping metal. 
"What are you doing, Sire?" asked Jewel sharply. 
"Drawing my sword to smite off the head of the accursed Ass," said Tirian in a terrible voice. "Stand 
clear, girl." 
"Oh don't, please don't," said Jill. "Really, you mustn't. It wasn't his fault. It was all the Ape. He didn't 
know any better. And he's very sorry. And he's a nice Donkey. His name's Puzzle. And I've got my arms 

round his neck." 
"Jill," said Tirian, "you are the bravest and most woodwise of all my subjects, but also the most malapert 
and disobedient. Well: let the Ass live. What have you to say for yourself, Ass?" 
"Me, Sire?" came the Donkey's voice. "I'm sure I'm very sorry if I've done wrong. The Ape said Aslan 
wanted me to dress up like that. And I thought he'd know. I'm not clever like him. I only did what I was 
told. It wasn't any fun for me living in that stable. I don't even know what's been going on outside. He 
never let me out except for a minute or two at night. Some days they forgot to give me any water too." 
"Sire," said Jewel. "Those Dwarfs are coming nearer and nearer. Do we want to meet them?" 
Tirian thought for a moment and then suddenly gave a great laugh out loud. Then he spoke, not this time 
in a whisper. "By the Lion," he said, "I am growing slow witted! Meet them? Certainly we will meet 
them. We will meet anyone now. We have this Ass to show them. Let them see the thing they have feared 
and bowed to. We can show them the truth of the Ape's vile plot. His secret's out. The tide's turned. 
Tomorrow we shall hang that Ape on the highest tree in Narnia. No more whispering and skulking and 
disguises. Where are these honest Dwarfs? We have good news for them." 
When you have been whispering for hours the mere sound of anyone talking out loud has a wonderfully 
stirring effect. The whole party began talking and laughing: even Puzzle lifted up his head and gave a 
grand Haw-hee-haw-hee-hee; a thing the Ape hadn't allowed him to do for days. Then they set off in the 
direction of the drumming. It grew steadily louder and soon they could see torchlight as well. They came 
out on one of those rough roads (we should hardly call them roads at all in England) which ran through 
Lantern Waste. And there, marching sturdily along, were about thirty Dwarfs, all with their little spades 
and mattocks over their shoulders. Two armed Calormenes led the column and two more brought up the 
rear. 
"Stay!" thundered Tirian as he stepped out on the road. "Stay, soldiers. Whither do you lead these 
Narnian Dwarfs and by whose orders?" 

THE two Calormene soldiers at the head of the column, seeing what they took for a Tarkaan or great lord 
with two armed pages, came to a halt and raised their spears in salute. 
"O My Master," said one of them, "we lead these manikins to Calormen to work in the mines of The 
Tisroc, may-he-live-forever. " 
"By the great god Tash, they are very obedient," said Tirian. Then suddenly he turned to the Dwarfs 
themselves. About one in six of them carried a torch and by that flickering light he could see their bearded 
faces all looking at him with grim and dogged expressions. "Has The Tisroc fought a great battle, Dwarfs, 
and conquered your land?" he asked, "that thus you go patiently to die in the salt-pits of Pugrahan?" 
The two soldiers glared at him in surprise but the Dwarfs all answered, "Aslan's orders, Aslan's orders. 
He's sold us. What can we do against him?" 
"Tisroc indeed!" added one and spat. "I'd like to see him try it!" 
"Silence, dogs!" said the chief soldier. 
"Look!" said Tirian, pulling Puzzle forward into the light. "It has all been a lie. Aslan has not come to 
Narnia at all. You have been cheated by the Ape. This is the thing he brought out of the stable to show 
you. Look at it." 
What the Dwarfs saw, now that they could see it close, was certainly enough to make them wonder how 
they had ever been taken in. The lion-skin had got pretty untidy already during Puzzle's imprisonment in 
the stable and it had been knocked crooked during his journey through the dark wood. Most of it was in a 
big lump on one shoulder. The head, besides being pushed sideways, had somehow got very far back so 
that anyone could now see his silly, gentle, donkeyish face gazing out of it. Some grass stuck out of one 
corner of his mouth, for he'd been doing a little quiet nibbling as they brought him along. And he was 
muttering, "It wasn't my fault, I'm not clever. I never said I was." 

For one second all the Dwarfs were staring at Puzzle with wide open mouths and then one of the soldiers 
said sharply, "Are you mad, My Master? What are you doing to the slaves?" and the other said, "And who 
are you?" Neither of their spears was at the salute now - both were down and ready for action. 
"Give the password," said the chief soldier. 
"This is my password," said the King as he drew his sword. "The light is dawning, the lie broken. Now 
guard thee, miscreant, for I am Tirian of Narnia." 
He flew upon the chief soldier like lightning. Eustace, who had drawn his sword when he saw the King 
draw his, rushed at the other one: his face was deadly pale, but I wouldn't blame him for that. And he had 
the luck that beginners sometimes do have. He forgot all that Tirian had tried to teach him that afternoon, 
slashed wildly (indeed I'm not sure his eyes weren't shut) and suddenly found, to his own great surprise, 
that the Calormene lay dead at his feet. And though that was a great relief, it was, at the moment, rather 
frightening. The King's fight lasted a second or two longer: then he too had killed his man and shouted to 
Eustace, "'Ware the other two." 
But the Dwarfs had settled the two remaining Calormenes. There was no enemy left. 
"Well struck, Eustace!" cried Tirian, clapping him on the back. "Now, Dwarfs, you are free. Tomorrow I 
will lead you to free all Narnia. Three cheers for Aslan!" 
But the result which followed was simply wretched. There was a feeble attempt from a few Dwarfs 
(about five) which died away all at once: from several others there were sulky growls. Many said nothing 
at all. 
"Don't they understand?" said Jill impatiently. "What's wrong with all you Dwarfs? Don't you hear what 
the King says? It's all over. The Ape isn't going to rule Narnia any longer. Everyone can go back to 
ordinary life. You can have fun again. Aren't you glad?" 
After a pause of nearly a minute a not-very-nice-looking Dwarf with hair and beard as black as soot said: 
"And who might you be, Missie?" 

"I'm Jill," she said. "The same Jill who rescued King Rilian from the enchantment and this is Eustace 
who did it too - and we've come back from another world after hundreds of years. Aslan sent us." 
The Dwarfs all looked at one another with grins; sneering grins, not merry ones. 
"Well," said the Black Dwarf (whose name was Griffle), "I don't know how all you chaps feel, but I feel 
I've heard as much about Aslan as I want to for the rest of my life." 
"That's right, that's right," growled the other Dwarfs. "It's all a plant, all a blooming plant." 
"What do you mean?" said Tirian. He had not been pale when he was fighting but he was pale now. He 
had thought this was going to be a beautiful moment, but it was turning out more like a bad dream. 
"You must think we're blooming soft in the head, that you must," said Griffle. "We've been taken in once 
and now you expect us to be taken in again the next minute. We've no more use for stories about Aslan, 
see! Look at him! An old moke with long ears!" 
"By heaven, you make me mad," said Tirian. "Which of us said that was Aslan? That is the Ape's 
imitation of the real Aslan. Can't you understand?" 
"And you've got a better imitation, I suppose!" said Griffle. "No thanks. We've been fooled once and 
we're not going to be fooled again." 
"I have not," said Tirian angrily, "I serve the real Aslan." 
"Where's he? Who's he? Show him to us!" said several Dwarfs. 
"Do you think I keep him in my wallet, fools?" said Tirian. "Who am I that I could make Aslan appear at 
my bidding? He's not a tame lion." 

The moment those words were out of his mouth he realized that he had made a false move. The Dwarfs at 
once began repeating "not a tame lion, not a tame lion," in a jeering sing-song. "That's what the other lot 
kept on telling us," said one. 
"Do you mean you don't believe in the real Aslan?" said Jill. "But I've seen him. And he has sent us two 
here out of a different world." 
"Ah," said Griffle with a broad smile. "So you say. They've taught you your stuff all right. Saying your 
lessons, ain't you?" 
"Churl," cried Tirian, "will you give a lady the lie to her very face?" 
"You keep a civil tongue in your head, Mister," replied the Dwarf. "I don't think we want any more Kings 
- if you are Tirian, which you don't look like him - no more than we want any Aslans. We're going to look 
after ourselves from now on and touch our caps to nobody. See?" 
"That's right," said the other Dwarfs. "We're on our own now. No more Aslan, no more Kings, no more 
silly stories about other worlds. The Dwarfs are for the Dwarfs." And they began to fall into their places 
and to get ready for marching back to wherever they had come from. 
"Little beasts!" said Eustace. "Aren't you even going to say thank you for being saved from the saltmines?" 
"Oh, we know all about that," said Griffle over his shoulder. "You wanted to make use of us, that's why 
you rescued us. You're playing some game of your own. Come on you chaps." 
And the Dwarfs struck up the queer little marching song which goes with the drum-beat, and off they 
tramped into the darkness. 

Tirian and his friends stared after them. Then he said the single word "Come," and they continued their 
journey. 
They were a silent party. Puzzle felt himself to be still in disgrace, and also he didn't really quite 
understand what had happened. Jill, besides being disgusted with the Dwarfs, was very impressed with 
Eustace's victory over the Calormene and felt almost shy. As for Eustace, his heart was still beating rather 
quickly. Tirian and Jewel walked sadly together in the rear. The King had his arm on the Unicorn's 
shoulder and sometimes the Unicorn nuzzled the King's cheek with his soft nose. They did not try to 
comfort one another with words. It wasn't very easy to think of anything to say that would be comforting. 
Tirian had never dreamed that one of the results of an Ape's setting up as a false Aslan would be to stop 
people from believing in the real one. He had felt quite sure that the Dwarfs would rally to his side the 
moment he showed them how they had been deceived. And then next night he would have led them to 
Stable Hill and shown Puzzle to all the creatures and everyone would have turned against the Ape and, 
perhaps after a scuffle with the Calormenes, the whole thing would have been over. But now, it seemed, 
he could count on nothing. How many other Narnians might turn the same way as the Dwarfs? 
"Somebody's coming after us, I think," said Puzzle suddenly. 
They stopped and listened. Sure enough, there was a thump-thump of small feet behind them. 
"Who goes there!" shouted the King. 
"Only me, Sire," came a voice. "Me, Poggin the Dwarf. I've only just managed to get away from the 
others. I'm on your side, Sire: and on Aslan's. If you can put a Dwarfish sword in my fist, I'd gladly strike 
a blow on the right side before all's done." 
Everyone crowded round him and welcomed him and praised him and slapped him on the back. Of 
course one single Dwarf could not make a very great difference, but it was somehow very cheering to 
have even one. The whole party brightened up. But Jill and Eustace didn't stay bright for very long, for 
they were now yawning their heads off and too tired to think about anything but bed. 
It was at the coldest hour of the night, just before dawn, that they got back to the Tower. If there had been 
a meal ready for them they would have been glad enough to eat, but the bother and delay of getting one 
was not to be thought of. They drank from a stream, splashed their faces with water, and tumbled into 
their bunks, except for Puzzle and Jewel who said they'd be more comfortable outside. This perhaps was 
just as well, for a Unicorn and a fat, full-grown Donkey indoors always make a room feel rather crowded. 

Narnian Dwarfs, though less than four feet high, are for their size about the toughest and strongest 
creatures there are, so that Poggin, in spite of a heavy day and a late night, woke fully refreshed before 
any of the others. He at once took Jill's bow, went out and shot a couple of wood pigeons. Then he sat 
plucking them on the doorstep and chatting to Jewel and Puzzle. Puzzle looked and felt a good deal better 
this morning. Jewel, being a Unicorn and therefore one of the noblest and delicatest of beasts, had been 
very kind to him, talking to him about things of the sort they could both understand like grass and sugar 
and the care of one's hoofs. When Jill and Eustace came out of the Tower yawning and rubbing their eyes 
at almost half past ten, the Dwarf showed them where they could gather plenty of a Narnian weed called 
Wild Fresney, which looks rather like our wood-sorrel but tastes a good deal nicer when cooked. (It needs 
a little butter and pepper to make it perfect, but they hadn't got these.) So that what with one thing and 
another, they had the makings of a capital stew for their breakfast or dinner, whichever you choose to call 
it. Tirian went a little further off into the wood with an axe and brought back some branches for fuel. 
While the meal was cooking - which seemed a very long time, especially as it smelled nicer and nicer the 
nearer it came to being done - the King found a complete Dwarfish outfit for Poggin: mail shirt, helmet, 
shield, sword, belt, and dagger. Then he inspected Eustace's sword and found that Eustace had put it back 
in the sheath all messy from killing the Calormene. He was scolded for that and made to clean and polish 
it. 
All this while Jill went to and fro, sometimes stirring the pot and sometimes looking out enviously at the 
Donkey and the Unicorn who were contentedly grazing. How many times that morning she wished she 
could eat grass! 
But when the meal came everyone felt it had been worth waiting for, and there were second helpings all 
round. When everyone had eaten as much as he could, the three humans and the Dwarf came and sat on 
the doorstep, the four-footed ones lay down facing them, the Dwarf (with permission both from Jill and 
from Tirian) lit his pipe, and the King said: 
"Now, friend Poggin, you have more news of the enemy, belike, than we. Tell us all you know. And first, 
what tale do they tell of my escape?" 
"As cunning a tale, Sire, as ever was devised," said Poggin. "It was the Cat, Ginger, who told it, and most 
likely made it up too. This Ginger, Sire - oh, he's a slyboots if ever a cat was - said he was walking past 
the tree to which those villains bound your Majesty. And he said (saving your reverence) that you were 
howling and swearing and cursing Aslan: `language I wouldn't like to repeat' were the words he used, 
looking ever so prim and proper you know the way a Cat can when it pleases. And then, says Ginger, 
Aslan himself suddenly appeared in a flash of lightning and swallowed your Majesty up at one mouthful. 
All the Beasts trembled at this story and some fainted right away. And of course the Ape followed it up. 
There, he says, see what Aslan does to those who don't respect him. Let that be a warning to you all. And 
the poor creatures wailed and whined and said, it will, it will. So that in the upshot your Majesty's escape 

has not set them thinking whether you still have loyal friends to aid you, but only made them more afraid 
and more obedient to the Ape." 
"What devilish policy!" said Tirian. "This Ginger, then, is close in the Ape's counsels." 
"It's more a question by now, Sire, if the Ape is in his counsels," replied the Dwarf. "The Ape has taken 
to drinking, you see. My belief is that the plot is now mostly carried on by Ginger or Rishda - that's the 
Calormene captain. And I think some words that Ginger has scattered among the Dwarfs are chiefly to 
blame for the scurvy return they made you. And I'll tell you why. One of those dreadful midnight 
meetings had just broken up the night before last and I'd gone a bit of the way home when I found I'd left 
my pipe behind. It was a real good 'un, an old favourite, so I went back to look for it. But before I got to 
the place where I'd been sitting (it was black as pitch there) I heard a cat's voice say Mew and a 
Calormene voice say `here . . . speak softly,' so I just stood as still as if I was frozen. And these two were 
Ginger and Rishda Tarkaan as they call him. `Noble Tarkaan,' said the Cat in that silky voice of his, `I just 
wanted to know exactly what we both meant today about Aslan meaning no more than Tash.' `Doubtless, 
most sagacious of cats,' says the other, `you have perceived my meaning.' `You mean,' says Ginger, `that 
there's no such person as either." "All who are enlightened know that,' said the Tarkaan. `Then we can 
understand one another,' purrs the Cat. `Do you, like me, grow a little weary of the Ape?' `A stupid, 
greedy brute,' says the other, `but we must use him for the present. Thou and I must provide for all things 
in secret and make the Ape do our will.' `And it would be better, wouldn't it,' said Ginger, `to let some of 
the more enlightened Narnians into our counsels: one by one as we find them apt. For the Beasts who 
really believe in Aslan may turn at any moment: and will, if the Ape's folly betrays his secret. But those 
who care neither for Tash nor Aslan but have only an eye to their own profit and such reward as The 
Tisroc may give them when Narnia is a Calormene province, will be firm.' `Excellent Cat,' said the 
Captain. `But choose which ones carefully."' 
While the Dwarf had been speaking the day seemed to have changed. It had been sunny when they sat 
down. Now Puzzle shivered. Jewel shifted his head uneasily. Jill looked up. 
"It's clouding over," she said. 
"And it's so cold," said Puzzle. 
"Cold enough, by the Lion!" said Tirian, blowing on his hands. "And faugh! What foul smell is this?" 
"Phew!" gasped Eustace. "It's like something dead. Is there a dead bird somewhere about? And why 

didn't we notice it before?" 
With a great upheaval Jewel scrambled to his feet and pointed with his horn. 
"Look!" he cried. "Look at it! Look, look!" 
Then all six of them saw; and over all their faces there came an expression of uttermost dismay. 
IN the shadow of the trees on the far side of the clearing something was moving. It was gliding very 
slowly Northward. At a first glance you might have mistaken it for smoke, for it was grey and you could 
see things through it. But the deathly smell was not the smell of smoke. Also, this thing kept its shape 
instead of billowing and curling as smoke would have done. It was roughly the shape of a man but it had 
the head of a bird; some bird of prey with a cruel, curved beak. It had four arms which it held high above 
its head, stretching them out Northward as if it wanted to snatch all Narnia in its grip; and its fingers - all 
twenty of them - were curved like its beak and had long, pointed, bird-like claws instead of nails. It 
floated on the grass instead of walking, and the grass seemed to wither beneath it. 
After one look at it Puzzle gave a screaming bray and darted into the Tower. And Jill (who was no 
coward, as you know) hid her face in her hands to shut out the sight of it. The others watched it for 
perhaps a minute, until it streamed away into the thicker trees on their right and disappeared. Then the sun 
came out again, and the birds once more began to sing. 
Everyone started breathing properly again and moved. They had all been still as statues while it was in 
sight. 

"What was it?" said Eustace in a whisper. 
"I have seen it once before," said Tirian. "But that time it was carved in stone and overlaid with gold and 
had solid diamonds for eyes. It was when I was no older than thou, and had gone as a guest to The 
Tisroc's court in Tashbaan. 
He took me into the great temple of Tash. There I saw it, carved above the altar." 
"Then that - that thing - was Tash?" said Eustace. 
But instead of answering him Tirian slipped his arm behind Jill's shoulders and said, "How is it with you, 
Lady?" 
"A-all right," said Jill, taking her hands away from her pale face and trying to smile. "I'm all right. It only 
made me feel a little sick for a moment." 
"It seems, then," said the Unicorn, "that there is a real Tash, after all." 
"Yes," said the Dwarf. "And this fool of an Ape, who didn't believe in Tash, will get more than he 
bargained for! He called for Tash: Tash has come." 
"Where has it - he - the Thing - gone to?" said Jill. 
"North into the heart of Narnia," said Tirian. "It has come to dwell among us. They have called it and it 
has come." 
"Ho, ho, ho!" chuckled the Dwarf, rubbing his hairy hands together. "It will be a surprise for the Ape. 
People shouldn't call for demons unless they really mean what they say." 

"Who knows if Tash will be visible to the Ape?" said Jewel. 
"Where has Puzzle got to?" said Eustace. 
They all shouted out Puzzle's name and Jill went round to the other side of the Tower to see if he had 
gone there. 
They were quite tired of looking for him when at last his large grey head peered cautiously out of the 
doorway and he said, "Has it gone away?" And when at last they got him to come out, he was shivering 
the way a dog shivers before a thunderstorm. 
"I see now," said Puzzle, "that I really have been a very bad donkey. I ought never to have listened to 
Shift. I never thought things like this would begin to happen." 
"If you'd spent less time saying you weren't clever and more time trying to be as clever as you could -" 
began Eustace but Jill interrupted him. 
"Oh leave poor old Puzzle alone," she said. "It was all a mistake; wasn't it, Puzzle dear?" And she kissed 
him on the nose. 
Though rather shaken by what they had seen, the whole party now sat down again and went on with their 
talk. 
Jewel had little to tell them. While he was a prisoner he had spent nearly all his time tied up at the back 
of the stable, and had of course heard none of the enemies' plans. He had been kicked (he'd done some 
kicking back too) and beaten and threatened with death unless he would say that he believed it was Aslan 
who was brought out and shown to them by firelight every night. In fact he was going to be executed this 
very morning if he had not been rescued. He didn't know what had happened to the Lamb. 

The question they had to decide was whether they would go to Stable Hill again that night, show Puzzle 
to the Narnians and try to make them see how they had been tricked, or whether they should steal away 
Eastward to meet the help which Roonwit the Centaur was bringing up from Cair Paravel and return 
against the Ape and his Calormenes in force. Tirian would very much like to have followed the first plan: 
he hated the idea of leaving the Ape to bully his people one moment longer than need be. On the other 
hand, the way the Dwarfs had behaved last night was a warning. Apparently one couldn't be sure how 
people would take it even if he showed them Puzzle. And there were the Calormene soldiers to be 
reckoned with. Poggin thought there were about thirty of them. Tirian felt sure that if the Narnians all 
rallied to his side, he and Jewel and the children and Poggin (Puzzle didn't count for much) would have a 
good chance of beating them. But how if half the Narnians - including all the Dwarfs - just sat and looked 
on? or even fought against him? The risk was too great. And there was, too, the cloudy shape of Tash. 
What might it do? 
And then, as Poggin pointed out, there was no harm in leaving the Ape to deal with his own difficulties 
for a day or two. He would have no Puzzle to bring out and show now. It wasn't easy to see what story he 
- or Ginger could make up to explain that. If the Beasts asked night after night to see Aslan, and no Aslan 
was brought out, surely even the simplest of them would get suspicious. 
In the end they all agreed that the best thing was to go off and try to meet Roonwit. 
As soon as they had decided this, it was wonderful how much more cheerful everyone became. I don't 
honestly think that this was because any of them was afraid of a fight (except perhaps Jill and Eustace). 
But I daresay that each of them, deep down inside, was very glad not to go any nearer - or not yet - to that 
horrible bird-headed thing which, visible or invisible, was now probably haunting Stable Hill. Anyway, 
one always feels better when one has made up one's mind. 
Tirian said they had better remove their disguises, as they didn't want to be mistaken for Calormenes and 
perhaps attacked by any loyal Narnians they might meet. The Dwarf made up a horrid-looking mess of 
ashes from the hearth and grease out of the jar of grease which was kept for rubbing on swords and spearheads. 
Then they took off their Calormene armour and went down to the stream. The nasty mixture made 
a lather just like soft soap: it was a pleasant, homely sight to see Tirian and the two children kneeling 
beside the water and scrubbing the backs of their necks or puffing and blowing as they splashed the lather 
off. Then they went back to the Tower with red, shiny faces, like people who have been given an extra 
good wash before a party. They re-armed themselves in true Narnian style, with straight swords and threecornered 
shields. "Body of me," said Tirian. "That is better. I feel a true man again." 
Puzzle begged very hard to have the lion-skin taken off him. He said it was too hot and the way it was 
rucked up on his back was uncomfortable: also, it made him look so silly. But they told him he would 
have to wear it a bit longer, for they still wanted to show him in that get-up to the other Beasts, even 
though they were now going to meet Roonwit first. 

What was left of the pigeon-meat and rabbit-meat was not worth bringing away but they took some 
biscuits. Then Tirian locked the door of the Tower and that was the end of their stay there. 
It was a little after two in the afternoon when they set out, and it was the first really warm day of that 
spring. The young leaves seemed to be much further out than yesterday: the snow-drops were over, but 
they saw several primroses. The sunlight slanted through the trees, birds sang, and always (though usually 
out of sight) there was the noise of running water. It was hard to think of horrible things like Tash. The 
children felt, "This is really Narnia at last." Even Tirian's heart grew lighter as he walked ahead of them, 
humming an old Narnian marching song which had the refrain: 
Ho, rumble, rumble, rumble, Rumble drum belaboured. 
After the King came Eustace and Poggin the Dwarf. Poggin was telling Eustace the names of all the 
Narnian trees, birds, and plants which he didn't know already. Sometimes Eustace would tell him about 
English ones. 
After them came Puzzle, and after him Jill and Jewel walking very close together. Jill had, as you might 
say, quite fallen in love with the Unicorn. She thought- and she wasn't far wrong - that he was the 
shiningest, delicatest, most graceful animal she had ever met: and he was so gentle and soft of speech that, 
if you hadn't known, you would hardly have believed how fierce and terrible he could be in battle. 
"Oh, this is nice!" said Jill. "Just walking along like this. I wish there could be more of this sort of 
adventure. It's a pity there's always so much happening in Narnia." 
But the Unicorn explained to her that she was quite mistaken. He said that the Sons and Daughters of 
Adam and Eve were brought out of their own strange world into Narnia only at times when Narnia was 
stirred and upset, but she mustn't think it was always like that. In between their visits there were hundreds 
and thousands of years when peaceful King followed peaceful King till you could hardly remember their 
names or count their numbers, and there was really hardly anything to put into the History Books. And he 
went on to talk of old Queens and heroes whom she had never heard of. He spoke of Swanwhite the 
Queen who had lived before the days of the White Witch and the Great Winter, who was so beautiful that 
when she looked into any forest pool the reflection of her face shone out of the water like a star by night 
for a year and a day afterwards. He spoke of Moonwood the Hare who had such ears that he could sit by 
Caldron Pool under the thunder of the great waterfall and hear what men spoke in whispers at Cair 
Paravel. He told how King Gale, who was ninth in descent from Frank the first of all Kings, had sailed far 

away into the Eastern seas and delivered the Lone Islanders from a dragon and how, in return, they had 
given him the Lone Islands to be part of the royal lands of Narnia for ever. He talked of whole centuries in 
which all Narnia was so happy that notable dances and feasts, or at most tournaments, were the only 
things that could be remembered, and every day and week had been better than the last. And as he went 
on, the picture of all those happy years, all the thousands of them, piled up in Jill's mind till it was rather 
like looking down from a high hill on to a rich, lovely plain full of woods and waters and cornfields, 
which spread away and away till it got thin and misty from distance. And she said: 
"Oh, I do hope we can soon settle the Ape and get back to those good, ordinary times. And then I hope 
they'll go on for ever and ever and ever. Our world is going to have an end some day. Perhaps this one 
won't. Oh Jewel wouldn't it be lovely if Narnia just went on and on - like what you said it has been?" 
"Nay, sister," answered Jewel, "all worlds draw to an end, except Aslan's own country." 
"Well, at least," said Jill, "I hope the end of this one is millions of millions of millions of years away - 
hallo! what are we stopping for?" 
The King and Eustace and the Dwarf were all staring up at the sky. Jill shuddered, remembering what 
horrors they had seen already. But it was nothing of that sort this time. It was small, and looked black 
against the blue. 
"I dare swear," said the Unicorn, "from its flight, that it is a Talking bird." 
"So think I," said the King. "But is it a friend, or a spy of the Ape's?" 
"To me, Sire," said the Dwarf, "it has a look of Far-sight the Eagle." 
"Ought we to hide under the trees?" said Eustace. 
"Nay," said Tirian, "best stand still as rocks. He would see us for certain if we moved." 

"Look! He wheels, he has seen us already," said Jewel. "He is coming down in wide circles." 
"Arrow on string, Lady," said Tirian to Jill. "But by no means shoot till I bid you. He may be a friend." 
If one had known what was going to happen next it would have been a treat to watch the grace and ease 
with which the huge bird glided down. He alighted on a rocky crag a few feet from Tirian, bowed his 
crested head, and said in his strange eagle's-voice, "Hail, King." 
"Hail, Farsight," said Tirian. "And since you call me King, I may well believe you are not a follower of 
the Ape and his false Aslan. I am right glad of your coming." 
"Sire," said the Eagle, "when you have heard my news you will be sorrier of my coming than of the 
greatest woe that ever befell you." 
Tirian's heart seemed to stop beating at these words, but he set his teeth and said, "Tell on." 
"Two sights have I seen," said Farsight. "One was Cair Paravel filled with dead Narnians and living 
Calormenes: The Tisroc's banner advanced upon your royal battlements: and your subjects flying from the 
city - this way and that, into the woods. Cair Paravel was taken from the sea. Twenty great ships of 
Calormen put in there in the dark of the night before last night." 
No one could speak. 
"And the other sight, five leagues nearer than Cair Paravel, was Roonwit the Centaur lying dead with a 
Calormene arrow in his side. I was with him in his last hour and he gave me this message to your 
Majesty: to remember that all worlds draw to an end and that noble death is a treasure which no one is too 
poor to buy." 
"So," said the King, after a long silence, "Narnia is no more." 

Fop, a long time they could not speak nor even shed a tear. Then the Unicorn stamped the ground with 
his hoof, and shook his mane, and spoke. 
"Sire," he said, "there is now no need of counsel. We see that the Ape's plans were laid deeper than we 
dreamed of. Doubtless he has been long in secret traffic with The Tisroc, and as soon as he had found the 
lion-skin he sent him word to make ready his navy for the taking of Cair Paravel and all Narnia. Nothing 
now remains for us seven but to go back to Stable Hill, proclaim the truth, and take the adventure that 
Aslan sends us. And if, by a great marvel, we defeat those thirty Calormenes who are with the Ape, then 
to turn again and die in battle with the far greater host of them that will soon march from Cair Paravel." 
Tirian nodded. But he turned to the children and said: "Now, friends, it is time for you to go hence into 
your own world. Doubtless you have done all that you were sent to do." 
"B - but we've done nothing," said Jill who was shivering, not with fear exactly but because everything 
was so horrible. 
"Nay," said the King, "you loosed me from the tree: you glided before me like a snake last night in the 
wood and took Puzzle: and you, Eustace, killed your man. But you are too young to share in such a 
bloody end as we others must meet tonight or, it may be, three days hence. I entreat you - nay, I command 
you - to return to your own place. I should be put to shame if I let such young warriors fall in battle on my 
side." 
"No, no, no," said Jill (very white when she began speaking and then suddenly very red and then white 
again.) "We won't, I don't care what you say. We're going to stick to you whatever happens, aren't we, 
Eustace?" 
"Yes, but there's no need to get so worked up about it," said Eustace who had stuck his hands in his 
pockets (forgetting how very odd that looks when you are wearing a mail shirt). "Because, you see, we 

haven't any choice. What's the good of talking about our going back! How? We've got no magic for doing 
it!" 
This was very good sense but, at the moment, Jill hated Eustace for saying it. He was fond of being 
dreadfully matter-of-fact when other people got excited. 
When Tirian realized that the two strangers could not get home (unless Aslan suddenly whisked them 
away), he next wanted them to go across the Southern mountains into Archenland where they might 
possibly be safe. But they didn't know their way and there was no one to send with them. Also, as Poggin 
said, once the Calormenes had Narnia they would certainly take Archenland in the next week or so: The 
Tisroc had always wanted to have these Northern countries for his own. In the end Eustace and Jill 
begged so hard that Tirian said they could come with him and take their chance - or, as he much more 
sensibly called it, "the adventure that Aslan would send them". 
The King's first idea was that they should not go back to Stable Hill - they were sick of the very name of 
it by now till after dark. But the Dwarf told them that if they arrived there by daylight they would 
probably find the place deserted, except perhaps for a Calormene sentry. The Beasts were far too 
frightened by what the Ape (and Ginger) had told them about this new angry Aslan - or Tashlan - to go 
near it except when they were called together for these horrible midnight meetings. And Calormenes are 
never good woodsmen. Poggin thought that even by daylight they could easily get round to somewhere 
behind the stable without being seen. This would be much harder to do when the night had come and the 
Ape might be calling the Beasts together and all the Calormenes were on duty. And when the meeting did 
begin they could leave Puzzle at the back of the stable, completely out of sight, till the moment at which 
they wanted to produce him. This was obviously a good thing: for their only chance was to give the 
Narnians a sudden surprise. 
Everyone agreed and the whole party set off on a new line - North-West - towards the hated Hill. The 
Eagle sometimes flew to and fro above them, sometimes he sat perched on Puzzle's back. No one - not 
even the King himself except in some great need - would dream of riding on a Unicorn. 
This time Jill and Eustace walked together. They had been feeling very brave when they were begging to 
be allowed to come with the others, but now they didn't feel brave at all. 
"Pole," said Eustace in a whisper. "I may as well tell you I've got the wind up." 
"Oh you're all right, Scrubb," said Jill. "You can fight. But I - I'm just shaking, if you want to know the 

truth." 
"Oh shaking's nothing," said Eustace. "I'm feeling I'm going to be sick." 
"Don't talk about that, for goodness' sake," said Jill. 
They went on in silence for a minute or two. 
"Pole," said Eustace presently. 
"What?" said she. 
"What'll happen if we get killed here?" 
"Well we'll be dead, I suppose." 
"But I mean, what will happen in our own world? Shall we wake up and find ourselves back in that train? 
Or shall we just vanish and never be heard of any more? Or shall we be dead in England?" 
"Gosh. I never thought of that." 
"It'll be rum for Peter and the others if they saw me waving out of the window and then when the train 
comes in we're nowhere to be found! Or if they found two - I mean, if we're dead over there in England." 
"Ugh!" said Jill. "What a horrid idea." 

"It wouldn't be horrid for us," said Eustace. "We shouldn't be there." 
"I almost wish - no I don't, though," said Jill. 
"What were you going to say?" 
"I was going to say I wished we'd never come. But I don't, I don't, I don't. Even if we are killed. I'd rather 
be killed fighting for Narnia than grow old and stupid at home and perhaps go about in a bath-chair and 
then die in the end just the same." 
"Or be smashed up by British Railways!" 
"Why d'you say that?" 
"Well when that awful jerk came - the one that seemed to throw us into Narnia - I thought it was the 
beginning of a railway accident. So I was jolly glad to find ourselves here instead." 
While Jill and Eustace were talking about this, the others were discussing their plans and becoming less 
miserable. That was because they were now thinking of what was to be done this very night and the 
thought of what had happened to Narnia - the thought that all her glories and joys were over - was pushed 
away into the back part of their minds. The moment they stopped talking it would come out and make 
them wretched again: but they kept on talking. Poggin was really quite cheerful about the night's work 
they had to do. He was sure that the Boar and the Bear, and probably all the Dogs would come over to 
their side at once. And he couldn't believe that all the other Dwarfs would stick to Griffle. And fighting by 
firelight and in and out among trees would be an advantage to the weaker side. And then, if they could 
win tonight, need they really throw their lives away by meeting the main Calormene army a few days 
later? 
Why not hide in the woods, or even up in the Western Waste beyond the great waterfall and live like 
outlaws? And then they might gradually get stronger and stronger, for Talking Beasts and Archenlanders 
would be joining them every day. And at last they'd come out of hiding and sweep the Calormenes (who 
would have got careless by then) out of the country and Narnia would be revived. After all, something 
very like that had happened in the time of King Miraz! 

And Tirian heard all this and thought "But what about Tash?" and felt in his bones that none of it was 
going to happen. But he didn't say so. 
When they got nearer to Stable Hill of course everyone became quiet. Then the real wood-work began. 
From the moment at which they first saw the Hill to the moment at which they all arrived at the back of 
the stable, it took them over two hours. It's the sort of thing one couldn't describe properly unless one 
wrote pages and pages about it. The journey from each bit of cover to the next was a separate adventure, 
and there were very long waits in between, and several false alarms. If you are a good Scout or a good 
Guide you will know already what it must have been like. By about sunset they were all safe in a clump 
of holly trees about fifteen yards behind the stable. They all munched some biscuit and lay down. 
Then came the worst part, the waiting. Luckily for the children they slept for a couple of hours, but of 
course they woke up when the night grew cold, and what was worse, woke up very thirsty and with no 
chance of getting a drink. Puzzle just stood, shivering a little with nervousness, and said nothing. But 
Tirian, with his head against Jewel's flank, slept as soundly as if he were in his royal bed at Cair Paravel, 
till the sound of a gong beating awoke him and he sat up and saw that there was firelight on the far side of 
the stable and knew that the hour had come. 
"Kiss me, Jewel," he said. "For certainly this is our last night on earth. And if ever I offended against you 
in any matter great or small, forgive me now." 
"Dear King," said the Unicorn, "I could almost wish you had, so that I might forgive it. Farewell. We 
have known great joys together. If Aslan gave me my choice I would choose no other life than the life I 
have had and no other death than the one we go to." 
Then they woke up Farsight, who was asleep with his head under his wing (it made him look as if he had 
no head at all), and crept forward to the stable. They left Puzzle (not without a kind word, for no one was 
angry with him now) just behind it, telling him not to move till someone came to fetch him, and took up 
their position at one end of the stable. 
The bonfire had not been lit for long and was just beginning to blaze up. It was only a few feet away from 
them, and the great crowd of Narnian creatures were on the other side of it, so that Tirian could not at first 
see them very well, though of course he saw dozens of eyes shining with the reflection of the fire, as 
you've seen a rabbit's or cat's eyes in the headlights of a car. And just as Tirian took his place, the gong 
stopped beating and from somewhere on his left three figures appeared. One was Rishda Tarkaan the 
Calormene Captain. The second was the Ape. He was holding on to the Tarkaan's hand with one paw and 

kept whimpering and muttering, "Not so fast, don't go so fast, I'm not at all well. Oh my poor head! These 
midnight meetings are getting too much for me. Apes aren't meant to be up at night: It's not as if I was a 
rat or a bat - oh my poor head." On the other side of the Ape, walking very soft and stately, with his tail 
straight up in the air, came Ginger the Cat. They were heading for the bonfire and were so close to Tirian 
that they would have seen him at once if they had looked in the right direction. Fortunately they did not. 
But Tirian heard Rishda say to Ginger in a low voice: 
"Now, Cat, to thy post. See thou play thy part well." 
"Miaow, miaow. Count on me!" said Ginger. Then he stepped away beyond the bonfire and sat down in 
the front row of the assembled Beasts: in the audience, as you might say. 
For really, as it happened, the whole thing was rather like a theatre. The crowd of Narnians were like the 
people in the seats; the little grassy place just in front of the stable, where the bonfire burned and the Ape 
and the Captain stood to talk to the crowd, was like the stage; the stable itself was like the scenery at the 
back of the stage; and Tirian and his friends were like people peering round from behind the scenery. It 
was a splendid position. If any of them stepped forward into the full firelight, all eyes would be fixed on 
him at once: on the other hand, so long as they stood still in the shadow of the end-wall of the stable, it 
was a hundred to one against their being noticed. 
Rishda Tarkaan dragged the Ape up close to the fire. The pair of them turned to face the crowd, and this 
of course meant that their backs were towards Tirian and his friends. 
"Now, Monkey," said Rishda Tarkaan in a low voice. "Say the words that wiser heads have put into thy 
mouth. And hold up thy head." As he spoke he gave the Ape a little prod or kick from behind with the 
point of his toe. 
"Do leave me alone," muttered Shift. But he sat up straighter and began, in a louder voice - "Now listen, 
all of you. A terrible thing has happened. A wicked thing. The wickedest thing that ever was done in 
Narnia. And Aslan -" 
"Tashlan, fool," whispered Rishda Tarkaan. 
"Tashlan I mean, of course," said the Ape, "is very angry about it." 

There was a terrible silence while the Beasts waited to hear what new trouble was in store for them. The 
little party by the end-wall of the stable also held their breath. What on earth was coming now? 
"Yes," said the Ape. "At this very moment, when the Terrible One himself is among us - there in the 
stable just behind me - one wicked Beast has chosen to do what you'd think no one would dare to do even 
if He were a thousand miles away. It has dressed itself up in a lion-skin and is wandering about in these 
very woods pretending to be Aslan." 
Jill wondered for a moment if the Ape had gone mad. Was he going to tell the whole truth? A roar of 
horror and rage went up from the Beasts. "Grrr!" came the growls. "Who is he? Where is he? Just let me 
get my teeth into him!" 
"It was seen last night," screamed the Ape, "but it got away. It's a Donkey! A common, miserable Ass! If 
any of you see that Ass -" 
"Grrr!" growled the Beasts. "We will, we will. He'd better keep out of our way." 
Jill looked at the King: his mouth was open and his face was full of horror. And then she understood the 
devilish cunning of the enemies' plan. By mixing a little truth with it they had made their lie far stronger. 
What was the good, now, of telling the Beasts that an ass had been dressed up as a lion to deceive them? 
The Ape would only say, "That's just what I've said." What was the good of showing them Puzzle in his 
lion-skin? They would only tear him in pieces. "That's taken the wind out of our sails," whispered 
Eustace. "The ground is taken from under our feet," said Tirian. "Cursed, cursed cleverness!" said Poggin. 
"I'll be sworn that this new lie is of Ginger's making." 
JILL felt something tickling her ear. It was Jewel the Unicorn, whispering to her with the wide whisper 

of a horse's mouth. As soon as she heard what he was saying she nodded and tip-toed back to where 
Puzzle was standing. Quickly and quietly she cut the last cords that bound the lion-skin to him. It wouldn't 
do for him to be caught with that on, after what the Ape had said! She would like to have hidden the skin 
somewhere very far away, but it was too heavy. The best she could do was to kick it in among the thickest 
bushes. Then she made signs to Puzzle to follow her and they both joined the others. 
The Ape was speaking again. 
"And after a horrid thing like that, Aslan - Tashlan - is angrier than ever. He says he's been a great deal 
too good to you, coming out every night to be looked at, see! Well, he's not coming out any more." 
Howls and mewings and squeals and grunts were the Animals' answer to this, but suddenly a quite 
different voice broke in with a loud laugh. 
"Hark what the monkey says," it shouted. "We know why he isn't going to bring his precious Aslan out. 
I'll tell you why: because he hasn't got him. He never had anything except an old donkey with a lion-skin 
on its back. Now he's lost that and he doesn't know what to do." 
Tirian could not see the faces on the other side of the fire very well but he guessed this was Griffle the 
Chief Dwarf. And he was quite certain of it when, a second later, all the Dwarfs' voices joined in, singing: 
"Don't know what to do! Don't know what to do! Don't know what to do-o-o!" 
"Silence!" thundered Rishda Tarkaan. "Silence, children of mud! Listen to me, you other Narnians, lest I 
give command to my warriors to fall upon you with the edge of the sword. The Lord Shift has already told 
you of that wicked Ass. Do you think, because of him that there is no real Tashlan in the stable! Do you? 
Beware, beware." 
"No, no," shouted most of the crowd. But the Dwarfs said, "That's right, Darkie, you've got it. Come on, 
Monkey, show us what's in the stable, seeing is believing." 
When next there was a moment's quiet the Ape said: "You Dwarfs think you're very clever, don't you? 
But not so fast. I never said you couldn't see Tashlan. Anyone who likes can see him." 

The whole assembly became silent. Then, after nearly a minute, the Bear began in a slow, puzzled voice: 
"I don't quite understand all this," it grumbled, "I thought you said -" 
"You thought!" repeated the Ape. "As if anyone could call what goes on in your head thinking. Listen, 
you others. Anyone can see Tashlan. But he's not coming out. You have to go in and see him." 
"Oh, thank you, thank you, thank you," said dozens of voices. "That's what we wanted! We can go in and 
see him face to face. And now he'll be kind and it will all be as it used to be." And the Birds chattered, 
and the Dogs barked excitedly. Then suddenly, there was a great stirring and a noise of creatures rising to 
their feet, and in a second the whole lot of them would have been rushing forward and trying to crowd 
into the stable door all together. But the Ape shouted: 
"Get back! Quiet! Not so fast." 
The Beasts stopped, many of them with one paw in the with tails wagging, and all of them with heads on 
one side. 
"I thought you said," began the Bear, but Shift interrupted. 
"Anyone can go in," he said. "But, one at a time. Who'll go first? He didn't say he was feeling very kind. 
He's been licking his lips a lot since he swallowed up the wicked King the other night. He's been growling 
a good deal this morning. I wouldn't much like to go into that stable myself tonight. But just as you 
please. Who'd like to go in first? Don't blame me if he swallows you whole or blasts you into a cinder 
with the mere terror of his eyes. That's your affair. Now then! Who's first? What about one of you 
Dwarfs?" 
"Dilly, dilly, come and be killed!" sneered Griffle. "How do we know what you've got in there?" 
"Ho-ho!" cried the Ape. "So you're beginning to think there's something there, eh? Well, all you Beasts 
were making noise enough a minute ago. What's struck you all dumb? Who's going in first?" 

But the Beasts all stood looking at one another and began backing away from the stable. Very few tails 
were wagging now. The Ape waddled to and fro jeering at them. "Ho-ho-ho!" he chuckled. "I thought you 
were all so eager to see Tashlan face to face! Changed your mind, eh?" 
Tirian bent his head to hear something that Jill was trying to whisper in his ear. "What do you think is 
really inside the stable?" she said. "Who knows?" said Tirian. "Two Calormenes with drawn swords, as 
likely as not, one on each side of the door." "You don't think," said Jill, "it might be . . . you know . . . that 
horrid thing we saw?" "Tash himself?" whispered Tirian. "There's no knowing. But courage, child: we are 
all between the paws of the true Aslan." 
Then a most surprising thing happened. Ginger the Cat said in a cool, clear voice, not at all as if he was 
excited, "I'll go in, if you like." 
Every creature turned and fixed its eyes on the Cat. "Mark their subtleties, Sire," said Poggin to the King. 
"This cursed cat is in the plot, in the very centre of it. Whatever is in the stable will not hurt him, I'll be 
bound. Then Ginger will come out again and say that he has seen some wonder." 
But Tirian had no time to answer him. The Ape was calling the Cat to come forward. "Ho-ho!" said the 
Ape. "So you, a pert Puss, would look upon him face to face. Come on, then! I'll open the door for you. 
Don't blame me if he scares the whiskers off your face. That's your affair." 
And the Cat got up and came out of its place in the crowd, walking primly and daintily, with its tail in the 
air, not one hair on its sleek coat out of place. It came on till it had passed the fire and was so close that 
Tirian, from where he stood with his shoulder against the end-wall of the stable, could look right into its 
face. Its big green eyes never blinked. ("Cool as a cucumber," muttered Eustace. "It knows it has nothing 
to fear.") The Ape, chuckling and making faces, shuttled across beside the Cat: put up his paw: drew the 
bolt and opened the door. Tirian thought he could hear the Cat purring as it walked into the dark doorway. 
"Aii-aii-aouwee! -" The most horrible caterwaul you ever heard made everyone jump. You have been 
wakened yourself by cats quarrelling or making love on the roof in the middle of the night: you know the 
sound. 
This was worse. The Ape was knocked head over heels by Ginger coming back out of the stable at top 

speed. If you had not known he was a cat, you might have thought he was a ginger-coloured streak of 
lightning. He shot across the open grass, back into the crowd. No one wants to meet a cat in that state. 
You could see animals getting out of his way to left and right. He dashed up a tree, whisked around, and 
hung head downwards. His tail was bristled out till it was nearly as thick as his whole body: his eyes were 
like saucers of green fire: along his back every single hair stood on end. 
"I'd give my beard," whispered Poggin, "to know whether that brute is only acting or whether it has really 
found something in there that frightened it!" 
"Peace, friend," said Tirian, for the Captain and the Ape were also whispering and he wanted to hear 
what they said. He did not succeed, except that he heard the Ape once more whimpering "My head, my 
head," but he got the idea that those two were almost as puzzled by the cat's behaviour as himself. 
"Now, Ginger," said the Captain. "Enough of that noise. Tell them what thou hast seen." 
"Aii - Aii - Aaow - Awah," screamed the Cat. 
"Art thou not called a Talking Beast?" said the Captain. "Then hold thy devilish noise and talk." 
What followed was rather horrible. Tirian felt quite certain (and so did the others) that the Cat was trying 
to say something: but nothing came out of his mouth except the ordinary, ugly cat-noises you might hear 
from any angry or frightened old Tom in a backyard in England. And the longer he caterwauled the less 
like a Talking Beast he looked. Uneasy whimperings and little sharp squeals broke out from among the 
other Animals. 
"Look, look!" said the voice of the Bear. "It can't talk. It has forgotten how to talk! It has gone back to 
being a dumb beast. Look at its face." Everyone saw that it was true. And then the greatest terror of all fell 
upon those Narnians. For every one of them had been taught - when it was only a chick or a puppy or a 
cub - how Aslan at the beginning of the world had turned the beasts of Narnia into Talking Beasts and 
warned them that if they weren't good they might one day be turned back again and be like the poor 
witless animals one meets in other countries. "And now it is coming upon us," they moaned. 
"Mercy! Mercy!" wailed the Beasts. "Spare us, Lord Shift, stand between us and Aslan, you must always 
go in and speak to him for us. We daren't, we daren't." 

Ginger disappeared further up into the tree. No one ever saw him again. 
Tirian stood with his hand on his sword-hilt and his head bowed. He was dazed with the horrors of that 
night. Sometimes he thought it would be best to draw his sword at once and rush upon the Calormenes: 
then next moment he thought it would be better to wait and see what new turn affairs might take. And 
now a new turn came. 
"My Father," came a clear, ringing voice from the left of the crowd. Tirian knew at once that it was one 
of the Calormenes speaking, for in The Tisroc's army the common soldiers call the officers "My Master" 
but the officers call their senior officers "My Father". Jill and Eustace didn't know this but, after looking 
this way and that, they saw the speaker, for of course people at the sides of the crowd were easier to see 
than people in the middle where the glare of the fire made all beyond it look rather black. He was young 
and tall and slender, and even rather beautiful in the dark, haughty, Calormene way. 
"My Father," he said to the Captain, "I also desire to go in." 
"Peace, Emeth," said the Captain, "Who called thee to counsel? Does it become a boy to speak?" 
"My Father," said Emeth. "Truly I am younger than thou, yet I also am of the blood of the Tarkaans even 
as thou art, and I also am the servant of Tash. Therefore . . ." 
"Silence," said Rishda Tarkaan. "Am not I thy Captain? Thou hast nothing to do with this stable. It is for 
the Narnians." 
"Nay, my Father," answered Emeth. "Thou hast said that their Aslan and our Tash are all one. And if that 
is the truth, then Tash himself is in yonder. And how then sayest thou that I have nothing to do with him? 
For gladly would I die a thousand deaths if I might look once on the face of Tash." 
"Thou art a fool and understandest nothing," said Rishda Tarkaan. "These be high matters." 

Emeth's face grew sterner. "Is it then not true that Tash and Aslan are all one?" he asked. "Has the Ape 
lied to us?" 
"Of course they're all one," said the Ape. 
"Swear it, Ape," said Emeth. 
"Oh dear!" whimpered Shift, "I wish you'd all stop bothering me. My head does ache. Yes, yes, I swear 
it." 
"Then, my Father," said Emeth, "I am utterly determined to go in." 
"Fool," began Rishda Tarkaan, but at once the Dwarfs began shouting: "Come along, Darkie. Why don't 
you let him in? Why do you let Narnians in and keep your own people out? What have you got in there 
that you don't want your own men to meet?" 
Tirian and his friends could only see the back of Rishda Tarkaan, so they never knew what his face 
looked like as he shrugged his shoulders and said, "Bear witness all that I am guiltless of this young fool's 
blood. Get thee in, rash boy, and make haste." 
Then, just as Ginger had done, Emeth came walking forward into the open strip of grass between the 
bonfire and the stable. His eyes were shining, his face very solemn, his hand was on his sword-hilt, and he 
carried his head high. Jill felt like crying when she looked at his face. And Jewel whispered in the King's 
ear, "By the Lion's Mane, I almost love this young warrior, Calormene though he be. He is worthy of a 
better god than Tash." 
"I do wish we knew what is really inside there," said Eustace. 
Emeth opened the door and went in, into the black mouth of the stable. He closed the door behind him. 
Only a few moments passed - but it seemed longer before the door opened again. A figure in Calormene 
armour reeled out, fell on its back, and lay still: the door closed behind it. The Captain leaped towards it 

and bent down to stare at its face. He gave a start of surprise. Then he recovered himself and turned to the 
crowd, crying out: 
"The rash boy has had his will. He has looked on Tash and is dead. Take warning, all of you." 
"We will, we will," said the poor Beasts. But Tirian and his friends stared at the dead Calormene and then 
at one another. For they, being so close, could see what the crowd, being further off and beyond the fire, 
could not see: this dead man was not Emeth. He was quite different: an older man, thicker and not so tall, 
with a big beard. 
"Ho-ho-ho," chuckled the Ape. "Any more? Anyone else want to go in? Well, as you're all shy, I'll 
choose the next. You, you Boar! On you come. Drive him up, Calormenes. He shall see Tashlan face to 
face." 
"O-o-mph," grunted the Boar, rising heavily to his feet. "Come on, then. Try my tusks." 
When Tirian saw that brave Beast getting ready to fight for its life - and Calormene soldiers beginning to 
close in on it with their drawn scimitars - and no one going to its help - something seemed to burst inside 
him. He no longer cared if this was the best moment to interfere or not. 
"Swords out," he whispered to the others. "Arrow on string. Follow." 
Next moment the astonished Narnians saw seven figures leap forth in front of the stable, four of them in 
shining mail. The King's sword flashed in the firelight as he waved it above his head and cried in a great 
voice: 
"Here stand I, Tirian of Narnia, in Aslan's name, to prove with my body that Tash is a foul fiend, the Ape 
a manifold traitor, and these Calormenes worthy of death. To my side, all true Narnians. Would you wait 
till your new masters have killed you all one by one?" 

QUICK as lightning, Rishda Tarkaan leaped back out of reach of the King's sword. He was no coward, 
and would have fought single-handed against Tirian and the Dwarf if need were. But he could not take on 
the Eagle and the Unicorn as well. He knew how Eagles can fly into your face and peck at your eyes and 
blind you with their wings. And he had heard from his father (who had met Narnians in battle) that no 
man, except with arrows, or a long spear, can match a Unicorn, for it rears on its hind legs as it falls upon 
you and then you have its hoofs and its horn and its teeth to deal with all at once. So he rushed into the 
crowd and stood calling out: 
"To me, to me, warriors of The Tisroc, may-he-liveforever. To me, all loyal Narnians, lest the wrath of 
Tashlan fall upon you!" 
While this was happening two other things happened as well. The Ape had not realized his danger as 
quickly as the Tarkaan. For a second or so he remained squatting beside the fire staring at the newcomers. 
Then Tirian rushed upon the wretched creature, picked it up by the scruff of the neck, and dashed back to 
the stable shouting, "Open the door!" Poggin opened it. "Go and drink your own medicine, Shift!" said 
Tirian and hurled the Ape through into the darkness. But as the Dwarf banged the door shut again, a 
blinding greenish-blue light shone out from the inside of the stable, the earth shook, and there was a 
strange noise - a clucking and screaming as if it was the hoarse voice of some monstrous bird. The Beasts 
moaned and howled and called out "Tashlan! Hide us from him!" and many fell down, and many hid their 
faces in their wings or paws. No one except Farsight the Eagle, who has the best eyes of all living things, 
noticed the face of Rishda Tarkaan at that moment. And from what Farsight saw there he knew at once 
that Rishda was just as surprised, and nearly frightened, as everyone else. "There goes one," thought 
Farsight, "who has called on gods he does not believe in. How will it be with him if they have really 
come?" 
The third thing - which also happened at the same moment - was the only really beautiful thing that night. 
Every single Talking Dog in the whole meeting (there were fifteen of them) came bounding and barking 
joyously to the King's side. They were mostly great big dogs with thick shoulders and heavy jaws. Their 
coming was like the breaking of a great wave on the seabeach: it nearly knocked you down. For though 
they were Talking Dogs they were just as doggy as they could be: and they all stood up and put their front 
paws on the shoulders of the humans and licked their faces, all saying at once: "Welcome! Welcome! 
We'll help, we'll help, help, help. Show us how to help, show us how, how. How-how-how?" 
It was so lovely that it made you want to cry. This, at last, was the sort of thing they had been hoping for. 
And when, a moment later, several little animals (mice and moles and a squirrel or so) came pattering up, 

squealing with joy, and saying "See, see. We're here," and when, after that, the Bear and the Boar came 
too, Eustace began to feel that perhaps, after all, everything might be going to come right. But Tirian 
gazed round and saw how very few of the animals had moved. 
"To me! to me!" he called. "Have you all turned cowards since I was your King?" 
"We daren't," whimpered dozens of voices. "Tashlan would be angry. Shield us from Tashlan." 
"Where are all the Talking Horses?" said Tirian to the Boar. 
"We've seen, we've seen," squealed the Mice. "The Ape has made them work. They're all tied - down at 
the bottom of the hill." 
"Then all you little ones," said Tirian, "you nibblers and gnawers and nutcrackers, away with you as fast 
as you can scamper and see if the Horses are on our side. And if they are, get your teeth into the ropes and 
gnaw till the Horses are free and bring them hither." 
"With a good will, Sire," came the small voices, and with a whisk of tails those sharp-eyed and sharptoothed 
folk were off. Tirian smiled for mere love as he saw them go. But it was already time to be 
thinking of other things. Rishda Tarkaan was giving his orders. 
"Forward," he said. "Take all of them alive if you can and hurl them into the stable or drive them into it. 
When they are all in we will put fire to it and make them an offering to the great god Tash." 
"Ha!" said Farsight to himself. "So that is how he hopes to win Tash's pardon for his unbelief." 
The enemy line - about half of Rishda's force - was now moving forward, and Tirian had barely time to 
give his orders. 
"Out on the left, Jill, and try to shoot all you may before they reach us. Boar and Bear next to her. Poggin 

on my left, Eustace on my right. Hold the right wing, Jewel. Stand by him, Puzzle, and use your hoofs. 
Hover and strike, Farsight. You Dogs, just behind us. Go in among them after the sword-play has begun. 
Aslan to our aid!" 
Eustace stood with his heart beating terribly, hoping and hoping that he would be brave. He had never 
seen anything (though he had seen both a dragon and a seaserpent) that made his blood run so cold as that 
line of dark-faced bright-eyed men. There were fifteen Calormenes, a Talking Bull of Narnia, Slinkey the 
Fox, and Wraggle the Satyr. Then he heard twang-and-zipp on his left and one Calormene fell: then 
twang-andzipp again and the Satyr was down. "Oh, well done, daughter!" came Tirian's voice; and then 
the enemy were upon them. 
Eustace could never remember what happened in the next two minutes. It was all like a dream (the sort 
you have when your temperature is over 100) until he heard Rishda Tarkaan's voice calling out from the 
distance: 
"Retire. Back hither and re-form." 
Then Eustace came to his senses and saw the Calormenes scampering back to their friends. But not all of 
them. Two lay dead, pierced by Jewel's horn, one by Tirian's sword. The Fox lay dead at his own feet, and 
he wondered if it was he who had killed it. The Bull also was down, shot through the eye by an arrow 
from Jill and gashed in his side by the Boar's tusk. But our side had its losses too. Three dogs were killed 
and a fourth was hobbling behind the line on three legs and whimpering. The Bear lay on the ground, 
moving feebly. Then it mumbled in its throaty voice, bewildered to the last, "I - I don't understand," laid 
its big head down on the grass as quietly as a child going to sleep, and never moved again. 
In fact, the first attack had failed. Eustace didn't seem able to be glad about it: he was so terribly thirsty 
and his arm ached so. 
As the defeated Calormenes went back to their commander, the Dwarfs began jeering at them. 
"Had enough, Darkies?" they yelled. "Don't you like it? Why doesn't your great Tarkaan go and fight 
himself instead of sending you to be killed? Poor Darkies!" 
"Dwarfs," cried Tirian. "Come here and use your swords, not your tongues. There is still time. Dwarfs of 

Narnia! You can fight well, I know. Come back to your allegiance." 
"Yah!" sneered the Dwarfs. "Not likely. You're just as big humbugs as the other lot. We don't want any 
Kings. The Dwarfs are for the Dwarfs. Boo!" 
Then the Drum began: not a Dwarf drum this time, but a big bull's hide Calormene drum. The children 
from the very first hated the sound. Boom - boom - ba-ba-boom it went. But they would have hated it far 
worse if they had known what it meant. Tirian did. It meant that there were other Calormene troops 
somewhere near and that Rishda Tarkaan was calling them to his aid. Tirian and Jewel looked at one 
another sadly. They had just begun to hope that they might win that night: but it would be all over with 
them if new enemies appeared. 
Tirian gazed despairingly round. Several Narnians were standing with the Calormenes, whether through 
treachery or in honest fear of "Tashlan". Others were sitting still, staring, not likely to join either side. But 
there were fewer animals now: the crowd was much smaller. Clearly, several of them had just crept 
quietly away during the fighting. 
Boom - boom - ba-ba-boom went the horrible drum. Then another sound began to mix with it. "Listen!" 
said Jewel: and then "Look!" said Farsight. A moment later there was no doubt what it was. With a 
thunder of hoofs, with tossing heads, widened nostrils, and waving manes, over a score of Talking Horses 
of Narnia came charging up the hill. The gnawers and nibblers had done their work. 
Poggin the Dwarf and the children opened their mouths to cheer but that cheer never came. Suddenly the 
air was full of the sound of twanging bow-strings and hissing arrows. It was the Dwarfs who were 
shooting and - for a moment Jill could hardly believe her eyes - they were shooting the Horses. Dwarfs 
are deadly archers. Horse after Horse rolled over. Not one of those noble Beasts ever reached the King. 
"Little Swine," shrieked Eustace, dancing in his rage. "Dirty, filthy, treacherous little brutes." Even Jewel 
said, "Shall I run after those Dwarfs, Sire, and spit ten of them on my horn at each plunge?" But Tirian 
with his face as stern as stone, said, "Stand fast, Jewel. If you must weep, sweetheart (this was to Jill), 
turn your face aside and see you wet not your bow-string. And peace, Eustace. Do not scold, like a 
kitchen-girl. No warrior scolds. Courteous words or else hard knocks are his only language." 
But the Dwarfs jeered back at Eustace. "That was a surprise for you, little boy, eh? Thought we were on 
your side, did you? No fear. We don't want any Talking Horses. We don't want you to win any more than 
the other gang. You can't take us in. The Dwarfs are for the Dwarfs." 

Rishda Tarkaan was still talking to his men, doubtless making arrangements for the next attack and 
probably wishing he had sent his whole force into the first. The drum boomed on. Then, to their horror, 
Tirian and his friends heard, far fainter as if from a long way off, an answering drum. Another body of 
Calormenes had heard Rishda's signal and were coming to support him. You would not have known from 
Tirian's face that he had now given up all hope. 
"Listen," he whispered in a matter-of-fact voice, "we must attack now, before yonder miscreants are 
strengthened by their friends." 
"Bethink you, Sire," said Poggin, "that here we have the good wooden wall of the stable at our backs. If 
we advance, shall we not be encircled and get sword-points between our shoulders?" 
"I would say as you do, Dwarf," said Tirian. "Were it not their very plan to force us into the stable? The 
further we are from its deadly door, the better." 
"The King is right," said Farsight. "Away from this accursed stable, and whatever goblin lives inside it, at 
all costs." 
"Yes, do let's," said Eustace. "I'm coming to hate the very sight of it." 
"Good," said Tirian. "Now look yonder to our left. You see a great rock that gleams white like marble in 
the firelight. First we will fall upon those Calormenes. You, maiden, shall move out on our left and shoot 
as fast as ever you may into their ranks: and you, Eagle, fly at their faces from the right. Meanwhile we 
others will be charging them. When we are so close, Jill, that you can no longer shoot at them for fear of 
striking us, go back to the white rock and wait. You others, keep your ears wide even in the fighting. We 
must put them to flight in a few minutes or else not at all, for we are fewer than they. As soon as I call 
Back, then rush to join Jill at the white rock, where we shall have protection behind us and can breathe 
awhile. Now, be off, Jill." 
Feeling terribly alone, Jill ran out about twenty feet, put her right leg back and her left leg forward, and 
set an arrow to her string. She wished her hands were not shaking so. "'That's a rotten shot!" she said as 
her first arrow sped towards the enemy and flew over their heads. But she had another on the string next 
moment: she knew that speed was what mattered. She saw something big and black darting into the faces 

of the Calormenes. 'that was Farsight. First one man, and then another, dropped his sword and put up both 
his hands to defend his eyes. Then one of her own arrows hit a man, and another hit a Narnian wolf, who 
had, it seemed, joined the enemy. But she had been shooting only for a few seconds when she had to stop. 
With a flash of swords and of the Boar's tusks and Jewel's horn, and with deep baying from the dogs, 
Tirian and his party were rushing on their enemies, like men in a hundred yards' race. Jill was astonished 
to see how unprepared the Calormenes seemed to be. She did not realize that this was the result of her 
work and the Eagle's. Very few troops can keep on looking steadily to the front if they are getting arrows 
in their faces from one side and being pecked by an eagle on the other. 
"Oh well done. Well done!" shouted Jill. The King's party were cutting their way right into the enemy. 
The Unicorn was tossing men as you'd toss hay on a fork. Even Eustace seemed to Jill (who after all 
didn't know very much about swordsmanship) to be fighting brilliantly. The Dogs were at the Calormenes' 
throats. It was going to work! It was victory at last - With a horrible, cold shock Jill noticed a strange 
thing. Though Calormenes were falling at each Narnian sword-stroke, they never seemed to get any 
fewer. In fact, there were actually more of them now than when the fight began. There were more every 
second. They were running up from every side. They were new Calormenes. These new ones had spears. 
There was such a crowd of them that she could hardly see her own friends. Then she heard Tirian's voice 
crying: 
"Back! To the rock!" 
The enemy had been reinforced. The drum had done its work. 
JILL ought to have been back at the white rock already but she had quite forgotten that part of her orders 
in the excitement of watching the fight. Now she remembered. She turned at once and ran to it, and 
arrived there barely a second before the others. It thus happened that all of them, for a moment, had their 
backs to the enemy. They all wheeled round the moment they had reached it. A terrible sight met their 
eyes. 

A Calormene was running towards the stable door carrying something that kicked and struggled. As he 
came between them and the fire they could see clearly both the shape of the man and the shape of what he 
carried. It was Eustace. 
Tirian and the Unicorn rushed out to rescue him. But the Calormene was now far nearer to the door then 
they. Before they had covered half the distance he had flung Eustace in and shut the door on him. Half a 
dozen more Calormenes had run up behind him. They formed a line on the open space before the stable. 
There was no getting at it now. 
Even then Jill remembered to keep her face turned aside, well away from her bow. "Even if I can't stop 
blubbing, I won't get my string wet," she said. 
"'Ware arrows," said Poggin suddenly. 
Everyone ducked and pulled his helmet well over his 
nose. The Dogs crouched behind. But though a few arrows came their way it soon became clear that they 
were not being shot at. Griffle and his Dwarfs were at their archery again. This time they were coolly 
shooting at the Calormenes. 
"Keep it up, boys!" came Griffle's voice. "All together. Carefully. We don't want Darkies any more than 
we want Monkeys - or Lions - or Kings. The Dwarfs are for the Dwarfs." 
Whatever else you may say about Dwarfs, no one can say they aren't brave. They could easily have got 
away to some safe place. They preferred to stay and kill as many of both sides as they could, except when 
both sides were kind enough to save them trouble by killing one another. They wanted Narnia for their 
own. 
What perhaps they had not taken into account was that the Calormenes were mail-clad and the Horses 
had had no protection. Also the Calormenes had a leader. Rishda Tarkaan's voice cried out: 

"Thirty of you keep watch on those fools by the white rock. The rest, after me, that we may teach these 
sons of earth a lesson." 
Tirian and his friends, still panting from their fight and thankful for a few minutes' rest, stood and looked 
on while the Tarkaan led his men against the Dwarfs. It was a strange scene by now. The fire had sunk 
lower: the light it gave was now less and of a darker red. As far as one could see, the whole place of 
assembly was now empty except for the Dwarf and the Calormenes. In that light one couldn't make out 
much of what was happening. It sounded as if the Dwarfs were putting up a good fight. Tirian could hear 
Griffle using dreadful language, and every now and then the Tarkaan calling, "Take all you can alive! 
Take them alive!" 
Whatever that fight may have been like, it did not last long. The noise of it died away. Then Jill saw the 
Tarkaan coming back to the stable: eleven men followed him, dragging eleven bound Dwarfs. (Whether 
the others had all been killed, or whether some of them had got away, was never known.) 
"Throw them into the shrine of Tash," said Rishda Tarkaan. 
And when the eleven Dwarfs, one after the other, had been flung or kicked into that dark doorway and 
the door had been shut again, he bowed low to the stable and said: 
"These also are for thy burnt offering, Lord Tash." 
And all the Calormenes banged the flats of their swords on their shields and shouted, "Tash! Tash! The 
great god Tash! Inexorable Tash!" (There was no nonsense about "Tashlan" now.) 
The little party by the white rock watched these doings and whispered to one another. They had found a 
trickle of water coming down the rock and all had drunk eagerly - Jill and Poggin and the King in their 
hands, while the four-footed ones lapped from the little pool which it had made at the foot of the stone. 
Such was their thirst that it seemed the most delicious drink they had ever had in their lives, and while 
they were drinking they were perfectly happy and could not think of anything else. 
"I feel in my bones," said Poggin, "that we shall all, one by one, pass through that dark door before 
morning. I can think of a hundred deaths I would rather have died." 

"It is indeed a grim door," said Tirian. "It is more like a mouth." 
"Oh, can't we do anything to stop it?" said Jill in a shaken voice. 
"Nay, fair friend," said Jewel, nosing her gently. "It may be for us the door to Aslan's country and we 
shall sup at his table tonight." 
Rishda Tarkaan turned his back on the stable and walked slowly to a place in front of the white rock. 
"Hearken," he said. "If the Boar and the Dogs and the Unicorn will come over to me and put themselves 
in my mercy, their lives shall be spared. The Boar shall go to a cage in The Tisroc's garden, the Dogs to 
The Tisroc's kennels, and the Unicorn, when I have sawn his horn off, shall draw a cart. But the Eagle, the 
children, and he who was the King shall be offered to Tash this night." 
The only answer was growls. 
"Get on, warriors," said the Tarkaan. "Kill the beasts, but take the two-legged ones alive." 
And then the last battle of the last King of Narnia began. 
What made it hopeless, even apart from the numbers of the enemy, was the spears. The Calormenes who 
had been with the Ape almost from the beginning had had no spears: that was because they had come into 
Narnia by ones and twos, pretending to be peaceful merchants, and of course they had carried no spears 
for a spear is not a thing you can hide. The new ones must have come in later, after the Ape was already 
strong and they could march openly. The spears made all the difference. With a long spear you can kill a 
boar before you are in reach of his tusks and a unicorn before you are in reach of his horn; if you are very 
quick and keep your head. And now the levelled spears were closing in on Tirian and his last friends. 
Next minute they were all fighting for their lives. 

In a way it wasn't quite so bad as you might think. 
When you are using every muscle to the full - ducking under a spear-point here, leaping over it there, 
lunging forward, drawing back, wheeling round - you haven't much time to feel either frightened or sad. 
Tirian knew he could do nothing for the others now; they were all doomed together. He vaguely saw the 
Boar go down on one side of him, and Jewel fighting furiously on the other. Out of the corner of one eye 
he saw, but only just saw, a big Calormene pulling Jill away somewhere by her hair. But he hardly 
thought about any of these things. His only thought now was to sell his life as dearly as he could. The 
worst of it was that he couldn't keep to the position in which he had started, under the white rock. A man 
who is fighting a dozen enemies at once must take his chances wherever he can; must dart in wherever he 
sees an enemy's breast or neck unguarded. In a very few strokes this may get you quite a distance from the 
spot where you began. Tirian soon found that he was getting further and further to the right, nearer to the 
stable. He had a vague idea in his mind that there was some good reason for keeping away from it. But he 
couldn't now remember what the reason was. And anyway, he couldn't help it. 
All at once everything came quite clear. He found he was fighting the Tarkaan himself. The bonfire (what 
was left of it) was straight in front. He was in fact fighting in the very doorway of the stable, for it had 
been opened and two Calormenes were holding the door, ready to slam it shut the moment he was inside. 
He remembered everything now, and he realized that the enemy had been edging him to the stable on 
purpose ever since the fight began. And while he was thinking this he was still fighting the Tarkaan as 
hard as he could. 
A new idea came into Tirian's head. He dropped his sword, darted forward, in under the sweep of the 
Tarkaan's scimitar, seized his enemy by the belt with both hands, and jumped back into the stable, 
shouting: 
"Come in and meet Tash yourself!" 
There was a deafening noise. As when the Ape had been flung in, the earth shook and there was a 
blinding light. 
The Calormene soldiers outside screamed. "Tash, Tash!" and banged the door. If Tash wanted their own 
Captain, Tash must have him. They, at any rate, did not want to meet Tash. 
For a moment or two Tirian did not know where he was or even who he was. Then he steadied himself, 
blinked, and looked around. It was not dark inside the stable, as he had expected. He was in strong light: 

that was why he was blinking. 
He turned to look at Rishda Tarkaan, but Rishda was not looking at him. Rishda gave a great wail and 
pointed; then he put his hands before his face and fell flat, face downwards, on the ground. Tirian looked 
in the direction where the Tarkaan had pointed. And then he understood. 
A terrible figure was coming towards them. It was far smaller than the shape they had seen from the 
Tower, though still much bigger than a man, and it was the same. It had a vulture's head and four arms. Its 
beak was open and its eyes blazed. A croaking voice came from its beak. 
"Thou hast called me into Narnia, Rishda Tarkaan. Here I am. What hast thou to say?" 
But the Tarkaan neither lifted his face from the ground nor said a word. He was shaking like a man with a 
bad hiccup. He was brave enough in battle: but half his courage had left him earlier that night when he 
first began to suspect that there might be a real Tash. The rest of it had left him now. 
With a sudden jerk -like a hen stooping to pick up a worm - Tash pounced on the miserable Rishda and 
tucked him under the upper of his two right arms. Then Tash turned his head sidewise to fix Tirian with 
one of his terrible eyes: for of course, having a bird's head, he couldn't look at you straight. 
But immediately, from behind Tash, strong and calm as the summer sea, a voice said: 
"Begone, Monster, and take your lawful prey to your own place: in the name of Aslan and Aslan's great 
Father the Emperor-over-the-Sea." 
The hideous creature vanished, with the Tarkaan still under its arm. And Tirian turned to see who had 
spoken. 
And what he saw then set his heart beating as it had never beaten in any fight. 

Seven Kings and Queens stood before him, all with crowns on their heads and all in glittering clothes, but 
the Kings wore fine mail as well and had their swords drawn in their hands. Tirian bowed courteously and 
was about to speak when the youngest of the Queens laughed. He stared hard at her face, and then gasped 
with amazement, for he knew her. It was Jill: but not Jill as he had last seen her, with her face all dirt and 
tears and an old drill dress half slipping off one shoulder. Now she looked cool and fresh, as fresh as if 
she had just come from bathing. And at first he thought she looked older, but then didn't, and he could 
never make up his mind on that point. And then he saw that the youngest of the Kings was Eustace: but he 
also was changed as Jill was changed. 
Tirian suddenly felt awkward about coming among these people with the blood and dust and sweat of a 
battle still on him. Next moment he realized that he was not in that state at all. He was fresh and cool and 
clean, and dressed in such clothes as he would have worn for a great feast at Cair Paravel. (But in Narnia 
your good clothes were never your uncomfortable ones. They knew how to make things that felt beautiful 
as well as looking beautiful in Narnia: and there was no such thing as starch or flannel or elastic to be 
found from one end of the country to the other.) 
"Sire," said Jill coming forward and making a beautiful curtsey, "let me make you known to Peter the 
High King over all Kings in Narnia." 
Tirian had no need to ask which was the High King, for he remembered his face (though here it was far 
nobler) from his dream. He stepped forward, sank on one knee and kissed Peter's hand. 
"High King," he said. "You are welcome to me." 
And the High King raised him and kissed him on both cheeks as a High King should. Then he led him to 
the eldest of the Queens - but even she was not old, and there were no grey hairs on her head and no 
wrinkles on her cheek - and said, "Sir, this is that Lady Polly who came into Narnia on the First Day, 
when Aslan made the trees grow and the Beasts talk." He brought him next to a man whose golden beard 
flowed over his breast and whose face was full of wisdom. "And this," he said, "is the Lord Digory who 
was with her on that day. And this is my brother, King Edmund: and this my sister, the Queen Lucy." 
"Sir," said Tirian, when he had greeted all these. "If I have read the chronicle aright, there should be 
another. Has not your Majesty two sisters? Where is Queen Susan?" 
"My sister Susan," answered Peter shortly and gravely, "is no longer a friend of Narnia." 

"Yes," said Eustace, "and whenever you've tried to get her to come and talk about Narnia or do anything 
about Narnia, she says, `What wonderful memories you have! Fancy your still thinking about all those 
funny games we used to play when we were children.'" 
"Oh Susan!" said Jill. "She's interested in nothing nowadays except nylons and lipstick and invitations. 
She always was a jolly sight too keen on being grown-up." 
"Grown-up, indeed," said the Lady Polly. "I wish she would grow up. She wasted all her school time 
wanting to be the age she is now, and she'll waste all the rest of her life trying to stay that age. Her whole 
idea is to race on to the silliest time of one's life as quick as she can and then stop there as long as she 
can." 
"Well, don't let's talk about that now," said Peter. "Look! Here are lovely fruit-trees. Let us taste them." 
And then, for the first time, Tirian looked about him and realized how very queer this adventure was. 
TIRIAN had thought - or he would have thought if he had time to think at all - that they were inside a 
little thatched stable, about twelve feet long and six feet wide. In reality they stood on grass, the deep blue 
sky was overhead, and the air which blew gently on their faces was that of a day in early summer. Not far 
away from them rose a grove of trees, thickly leaved, but under every leaf there peeped out the gold or 
faint yellow or purple or glowing red of fruits such as no one has seen in our world. The fruit made Tirian 
feel that it must be autumn but there was something in the feel of the air that told him it could not be later 
than June. They all moved towards the trees. 

Everyone raised his hand to pick the fruit he best liked the look of, and then everyone paused for a 
second. This fruit was so beautiful that each felt "It can't be meant for me... surely we're not allowed to 
pluck it." 
"It's all right," said Peter. "I know what we're all thinking. But I'm sure, quite sure, we needn't. I've a 
feeling we've got to the country where everything is allowed." 
"Here goes, then!" said Eustace. And they all began to eat. 
What was the fruit like? Unfortunately no one can describe a taste. All I can say is that, compared with 
those fruits, the freshest grapefruit you've ever eaten was dull, and the juiciest orange was dry, and the 
most melting pear was hard and woody, and the sweetest wild strawberry was sour. And there were no 
seeds or stones, and no wasps. If you had once eaten that fruit, all the nicest things in this world would 
taste like medicines after it. But I can't describe it. You can't find out what it is like unless you can get to 
that country and taste it for yourself. 
When they had eaten enough, Eustace said to King Peter, "You haven't yet told us how you got here. You 
were just going to, when King Tirian turned up." 
"There's not much to tell," said Peter. "Edmund and I were standing on the platform and we saw your 
train coming in. I remember thinking it was taking the bend far too fast. And I remember thinking how 
funny it was that our people were probably in the same train though Lucy didn't know about it -" 
"Your people, High King?" said Tirian. 
"I mean my Father and Mother - Edmund's and Lucy's and mine." 
"Why were they?" asked Jill. "You don't mean to say they know about Narnia?" 
"Oh no, it had nothing to do with Narnia. They were on their way to Bristol. I'd only heard they were 
going that morning. But Edmund said they'd be bound to be going by that train." (Edmund was the sort of 

person who knows about railways.) 
"And what happened then?" said Jill. 
"Well, it's not very easy to describe, is it, Edmund?" said the High King. 
"Not very," said Edmund. "It wasn't at all like that other time when we were pulled out of our own world 
by Magic. There was a frightful roar and something hit me with a bang, but it didn't hurt. And I felt not so 
much scared as - well, excited. Oh - and this is one queer thing. 
I'd had a rather sore knee, from a hack at rugger. I noticed it had suddenly gone. And I felt very light. 
And then - here we were." 
"It was much the same for us in the railway carriage," said the Lord Digory, wiping the last traces of the 
fruit from his golden beard. "Only I think you and I, Polly, chiefly felt that we'd been unstiffened. You 
youngsters won't understand. But we stopped feeling old." 
"Youngsters, indeed!" said Jill. "I don't believe you two really are much older than we are here." 
"Well if we aren't, we have been," said the Lady Polly. 
"And what has been happening since you got here?" asked Eustace. 
"Well," said Peter, "for a long time (at least I suppose it was a long time) nothing happened. Then the 
door opened -" 
"The door?" said Tirian. 

"Yes," said Peter. "The door you came in - or came out - by. Have you forgotten?" 
"But where is it?" 
"Look," said Peter and pointed. 
Tirian looked and saw the queerest and most ridiculous thing you can imagine. Only a few yards away, 
clear to be seen in the sunlight, there stood up a rough wooden door and, round it, the framework of the 
doorway: nothing else, no walls, no roof. He walked towards it, bewildered, and the others followed, 
watching to see what he would do. He walked round to the other side of the door. But it looked just the 
same from the other side: he was still in the open air, on a summer morning. The door was simply 
standing up by itself as if it had grown there like a tree. 
"Fair Sir," said Tirian to the High King, "this is a great marvel." 
"It is the door you came through with that Calormene five minutes ago," said Peter smiling. 
"But did I not come in out of the wood into the stable? Whereas this seems to be a door leading from 
nowhere to nowhere." 
"It looks like that if you walk round it," said Peter. "But put your eye to that place where there is a crack 
between two of the planks and look through." 
Tirian put his eye to the hole. At first he could see nothing but blackness. Then, at his eyes grew used to 
it, he saw the dull red glow of a bonfire that was nearly going out, and above that, in a black sky, stars. 
Then he could see dark figures moving about or standing between him and the fire: he could hear them 
talking and their voices were like those of Calormenes. So he knew that he was looking out through the 
stable door into the darkness of Lantern Waste where he had fought his last battle. The men were 
discussing whether to go in and look for Rishda Tarkaan (but none of them wanted to do that) or to set 
fire to the stable. 
He looked round again and could hardly believe his eyes. There was the blue sky overhead, and grassy 

country spreading as far as he could see in every direction, and his new friends all round him laughing. 
"It seems, then," said Tirian, smiling himself, "that the stable seen from within and the stable seen from 
without are two different places." 
"Yes," said the Lord Digory. "Its inside is bigger than its outside." 
"Yes," said Queen Lucy. "In our world too, a stable once had something inside it that was bigger than our 
whole world." It was the first time she had spoken, and from the thrill in her voice, Tirian now knew why. 
She was drinking everything in even more deeply than the others. She had been too happy to speak. He 
wanted to hear her speak again, so he said: 
"Of your courtesy, Madam, tell on. Tell me your whole adventure." 
"After the shock and the noise," said Lucy, "we found ourselves here. And we wondered at the door, as 
you did. Then the door opened for the first time (we saw darkness through the doorway when it did) and 
there came through a big man with a naked sword. We saw by his arms that he was a Calormene. He took 
his stand beside the door with his sword raised, resting on his shoulder, ready to cut down anyone who 
came through. We went to him and spoke to him, but we thought he could neither see nor hear us. And he 
never looked round on the sky and the sunlight and the grass: I think he couldn't see them either. So then 
we waited a long time. Then we heard the bolt being drawn on the other side of the door. But the man 
didn't get ready to strike with his sword till he could see who was coming in. So we supposed he had been 
told to strike some and spare others. But at the very moment when the door opened, all of a sudden Tash 
was there, on this side of the door; none of us saw where he came from. And through the door there came 
a big Cat. It gave one look at Tash and ran for its life: just in time, for he pounced at it and the door hit his 
beak as it was shut. The man could see Tash. He turned very pale and bowed down before the Monster: 
but it vanished away. 
"Then we waited a long time again. At last the door opened for the third time and there came in a young 
Calormene. I liked him. The sentinel at the door started, and looked very surprised, when he saw him. I 
think he'd been expecting someone quite different -" 
"I see it all now," said Eustace (he had the bad habit of interrupting stories). "The Cat was to go in first 
and the sentry had orders to do him no harm. Then the Cat was to come out and say he'd seen their beastly 
Tashlan and pretend to be frightened so as to scare the other Animals. But what Shift never guessed was 
that the real Tash would turn up; so Ginger came out really frightened. And after that, Shift would send in 

anyone he wanted to get rid of and the sentry would kill them. 
And -" 
"Friend," said Tirian softly, "you hinder the lady in her tale." 
"Well," said Lucy, "the sentry was surprised. That gave the other man just time to get on guard. They had 
a fight. He killed the sentry and flung him outside the door. Then he came walking slowly forward to 
where we were. He could see us, and everything else. We tried to talk to him but he was rather like a man 
in a trance. He kept on saying Tash, Tash, where is Tash? I go to Tash. So we gave it up and he went 
away somewhere - over there. I liked him. And after that ... ugh!" Lucy made a face. 
"After that," said Edmund, "someone flung a monkey through the door. And Tash was there again. My 
sister is so tender-hearted she doesn't like to tell you that Tash made one peck and the Monkey was gone!" 
"Serve him right!" said Eustace. "All the same, I hope he'll disagree with Tash too." 
"And after that," said Edmund, "came about a dozen Dwarfs: and then Jill, and Eustace, and last of all 
yourself." 
"I hope Tash ate the Dwarfs too," said Eustace. "Little swine." 
"No, he didn't," said Lucy. "And don't be horrid. Thery're still here. In fact you can see them from here. 
And I've tried and tried to make friends with them but it's no use." 
"Friends with them!" cried Eustace. "If you knew how those Dwarfs have been behaving!" 
"Oh stop it, Eustace," said Lucy. "Do come and see them. King Tirian, perhaps you could do something 
with them." 

"I can feel no great love for Dwarfs today," said Tirian. "Yet at your asking, Lady, I would do a greater 
thing than this." 
Lucy led the way and soon they could all see the Dwarfs. They had a very odd look. They weren't 
strolling about or enjoying themselves (although the cords with which they had been tied seemed to have 
vanished) nor were they lying down and having a rest. They were sitting very close together in a little 
circle facing one another. They never looked round or took any notice of the humans till Lucy and Tirian 
were almost near enough to touch them. Then the Dwarfs all cocked their heads as if they couldn't see 
anyone but were listening hard and trying to guess by the sound what was happening. 
"Look out!" said one of them in a surly voice. "Mind where you're going. Don't walk into our faces!" 
"All right!" said Eustace indignantly. "We're not blind. We've got eyes in our heads." 
"They must be darn good ones if you can see in here," said the same Dwarf whose name was Diggle. 
"In where?" asked Edmund. 
"Why you bone-head, in here of course," said Diggle. "In this pitch-black, poky, smelly little hole of a 
stable." 
"Are you blind?" said Tirian. 
"Ain't we all blind in the dark!" said Diggle. 
"But it isn't dark, you poor stupid Dwarfs," said Lucy. "Can't you see? Look up! Look round! Can't you 
see the sky and the trees and the flowers? Can't you see me?" 

"How in the name of all Humbug can I see what ain't there? And how can I see you any more than you 
can see me in this pitch darkness?" 
"But I can see you," said Lucy. "I'll prove I can see you. You've got a pipe in your mouth." 
"Anyone that knows the smell of baccy could tell that," said Diggle. 
"Oh the poor things! This is dreadful," said Lucy. Then she had an idea. She stopped and picked some 
wild violets. "Listen, Dwarf," she said. "Even if your eyes are wrong, perhaps your nose is all right: can 
you smell that?" She leaned across and held the fresh, damp flowers to Diggle's ugly nose. But she had to 
jump back quickly in order to avoid a blow from his hard little fist. 
"None of that!" he shouted. "How dare you! What do you mean by shoving a lot of filthy stable-litter in 
my face? There was a thistle in it too. It's like your sauce! And who are you anyway?" 
"Earth-man," said Tirian, "she is the Queen Lucy, sent hither by Aslan out of the deep past. And it is for 
her sake alone that I, Tirian your lawful King, do not cut all your heads from your shoulders, proved and 
twice-proved traitors that you are." 
"Well if that doesn't beat everything!" exclaimed Diggle. "How can you go on talking all that rot? Your 
wonderful Lion didn't come and help you, did he? Thought not. And now - even now - when you've been 
beaten and shoved into this black hole, just the same as the rest of us, you're still at your old game. 
Starting a new lie! Trying to make us believe we're none of us shut up, and it ain't dark, and heaven knows 
what." 
"There is no black hole, save in your own fancy, fool," cried Tirian. "Come out of it." And, leaning 
forward, he caught Diggle by the belt and the hood and swung him right out of the circle of Dwarfs. But 
the moment Tirian put him down, Diggle darted back to his place among the others, rubbing his nose and 
howling: 
"Ow! Ow! What d'you do that for! Banging my face against the wall. You've nearly broken my nose." 

"Oh dear!" said Lucy, "What are we to do for them?" 
"Let 'em alone," said Eustace: but as he spoke the earth trembled. The sweet air grew suddenly sweeter. 
A brightness flashed behind them. All turned. Tirian turned last because he was afraid. There stood his 
heart's desire, huge and real, the golden Lion, Aslan himself, and already the others were kneeling in a 
circle round his forepaws and burying their hands and faces in his mane as he stooped his great head to 
touch them with his tongue. Then he fixed his eyes upon Tirian, and Tirian came near, trembling, and 
flung himself at the Lion's feet, and the Lion kissed him and said, "Well done, last of the Kings of Narnia 
who stood firm at the darkest hour." 
"Aslan," said Lucy through her tears, "could you - will you - do something for these poor Dwarfs?" 
"Dearest," said Aslan, "I will show you both what I can, and what I cannot, do." He came close to the 
Dwarfs and gave a low growl: low, but it set all the air shaking. But the Dwarfs said to one another, "Hear 
that? That's the gang at the other end of the stable. Trying to frighten us. They do it with a machine of 
some kind. Don't take any notice. They won't take us in again!" 
Aslan raised his head and shook his mane. Instantly a glorious feast appeared on the Dwarfs' knees: pies 
and tongues and pigeons and trifles and ices, and each Dwarf had a goblet of good wine in his right hand. 
But it wasn't much use. They began eating and drinking greedily enough, but it was clear that they 
couldn't taste it properly. They thought they were eating and drinking only the sort of things you might 
find in a stable. One said he was trying to eat hay and another said he had a bit of an old turnip and a third 
said he'd found a raw cabbage leaf. And they raised golden goblets of rich red wine to their lips and said 
"Ugh! Fancy drinking dirty water out of a trough that a donkey's been at! Never thought we'd come to 
this." But very soon every Dwarf began suspecting that every other Dwarf had found something nicer than 
he had, and they started grabbing and snatching, and went on to quarrelling, till in a few minutes there 
was a free fight and all the good food was smeared on their faces and clothes or trodden under foot. But 
when at last they sat down to nurse their black eyes and their bleeding noses, they all said: 
"Well, at any rate there's no Humbug here. We haven't let anyone take us in. The Dwarfs are for the 
Dwarfs." 
"You see, " said Aslan. "They will not let us help them. They have chosen cunning instead of belief. 
Their prison is only in their own minds, yet they are in that prison; and so afraid of being taken in that 
they cannot be taken out. But come, children. I have other work to do." 

He went to the Door and they all followed him. He raised his head and roared, "Now it is time!" then 
louder, "Time!"; then so loud that it could have shaken the stars, "TIME." The Door flew open. 
THEY all stood beside Aslan, on his right side, and looked through the open doorway. 
The bonfire had gone out. On the earth all was blackness: in fact you could not have told that you were 
looking into a wood if you had not seen where the dark shapes of the trees ended and the stars began. But 
when Aslan had roared yet again, out on their left they saw another black shape. That is, they saw another 
patch where there were no stars: and the patch rose up higher and higher and became the shape of a man, 
the hugest of all giants. They all knew Narnia well enough to work out where he must be standing. He 
must be on the high moorlands that stretch away to the North beyond the River Shribble. Then Jill and 
Eustace remembered how once long ago, in the deep caves beneath those moors, they had seen a great 
giant asleep and been told that his name was Father Time, and that he would wake on the day the world 
ended. 
"Yes," said Aslan, though they had not spoken. "While he lay dreaming his name was Time. Now that he 
is awake he will have a new one." 
Then the great giant raised a horn to his mouth. They could see this by the change of the black shape he 
made against the stars. After that - quite a bit later, because sound travels so slowly - they heard the sound 
of the horn: high and terrible, yet of a strange, deadly beauty. 
Immediately the sky became full of shooting stars. Even one shooting star is a fine thing to see; but these 
were dozens, and then scores, and then hundreds, till it was like silver rain: and it went on and on. And 
when it had gone on for some while, one or two of them began to think that there was another dark shape 
against the sky as well as the giant's. It was in a different place, right overhead, up in the very roof of the 
sky as you might call it. "Perhaps it is a cloud," thought Edmund. At any rate, there were no stars there: 

just blackness. But all around, the downpour of stars went on. And then the starless patch began to grow, 
spreading further and further out from the centre of the sky. And presently a quarter of the whole sky was 
black, and then a half, and at last the rain of shooting stars was going on only low down near the horizon. 
With a thrill of wonder (and there was some terror in it too) they all suddenly realized what was 
happening. The spreading blackness was not a cloud at all: it was simply emptiness. The black part of the 
sky was the part in which there were no stars left. All the stars were falling: Aslan had called them home. 
The last few seconds before the rain of stars had quite ended were very exciting. Stars began falling all 
round them. But stars in that world are not the great flaming globes they are in ours. They are people 
(Edmund and Lucy had once met one). So now they found showers of glittering people, all with long hair 
like burning silver and spears like white-hot metal, rushing down to them out of the black air, swifter than 
falling stones. They made a hissing noise as they landed and burnt the grass. And all these stars glided 
past them and stood somewhere behind, a little to the right. 
This was a great advantage, because otherwise, now that there were no stars in the sky, everything would 
have been completely dark and you could have seen nothing. As it was, the crowd of stars behind them 
cast a fierce, white light over their shoulders. They could see mile upon mile of Narnian woods spread out 
before them, looking as if they were floodlit. Every bush and almost every blade of grass had its black 
shadow behind it. The edge of every leaf stood out so sharp that you'd think you could cut your finger on 
it. 
On the grass before them lay their own shadows. But the great thing was Aslan's shadow. It streamed 
away to their left, enormous and very terrible. And all this was under a sky that would now be starless 
forever. 
The light from behind them (and a little to their right) was so strong that it lit up even the slopes of the 
Northern Moors. Something was moving there. Enormous animals were crawling and sliding down into 
Narnia: great dragons and giant lizards and featherless birds with wings like bats' wings. They 
disappeared into the woods and for a few minutes there was silence. Then there came - at first from very 
far off - sounds of wailing and then, from every direction, a rustling and a pattering and a sound of wings. 
It came nearer and nearer. Soon one could distinguish the scamper of little feet from the padding of big 
paws, and the clack-clack of light little hoofs from the thunder of great ones. And then one could see 
thousands of pairs of eyes gleaming. And at last, out of the shadow of the trees, racing up the hill for dear 
life, by thousands and by millions, came all kinds of creatures - Talking Beasts, Dwarfs, Satyrs, Fauns, 
Giants, Calormenes, men from Archenland, Monopods, and strange unearthly things from the remote 
islands of the unknown Western lands. And all these ran up to the doorway where Aslan stood. 

This part of the adventure was the only one which seemed rather like a dream at the time and rather hard 
to remember properly afterwards. Especially, one couldn't say how long it had taken. Sometimes it 
seemed to have lasted only a few minutes, but at others it felt as if it might have gone on for years. 
Obviously, unless either the Door had grown very much larger or the creatures had suddenly grown as 
small as gnats, a crowd like that couldn't ever have tried to get through it. But no one thought about that 
sort of thing at the time. 
The creatures came rushing on, their eyes brighter and brighter as they drew nearer and nearer to the 
standing Stars. But as they came right up to Aslan one or other of two things happened to each of them. 
They all looked straight in his face, I don't think they had any choice about that. And when some looked, 
the expression of their faces changed terribly - it was fear and hatred: except that, on the faces of Talking 
Bears, the fear and hatred lasted only for a fraction of a second. You could see that they suddenly ceased 
to the Talking Beasts. They were just ordinary animals. And all the creatures who looked at Aslan in that 
way swerved to their right, his left, and disappeared into his huge black shadow, which (as you have 
heard) streamed away to the left of the doorway. The children never saw them again. I don't know what 
became of them. But the others looked in the face of Aslan and loved him, though some of them were 
very frightened at the same time. And all these came in at the Door, in on Aslan's right. There were some 
queer specimens among them. Eustace even recognized one of those very Dwarfs who had helped to 
shoot the Horses. But he had no time to wonder about that sort of thing (and anyway it was no business of 
his) for a great joy put everything else out of his head. Among the happy creatures who now came 
crowding round Tirian and his friends were all those whom they had thought dead. There was Roonwit 
the Centaur and Jewel the Unicorn and the good Boar and the good Bear, and Farsight the Eagle, and the 
dear Dogs and the Horses, and Poggin the Dwarf. 
"Further in and higher up!" cried Roonwit and thundered away in a gallop to the West. And though they 
did not understand him, the words somehow set them tingling all over. The Boar grunted at them 
cheerfully. The Bear was just going to mutter that he still didn't understand, when he caught sight of the 
fruit-trees behind them. He waddled to those trees as fast as he could and there, no doubt, found 
something he understood very well. But the Dogs remained, wagging their tails, and Poggin remained, 
shaking hands with everyone and grinning all over his honest face. And Jewel leaned his snowy white 
head over the King's shoulder and the King whispered in Jewel's ear. Then everyone turned his attention 
again to what could be seen through the Doorway. 
The Dragons and Giant Lizards now had Narnia to themselves. They went to and fro tearing up the trees 
by the roots and crunching them up as if they were sticks of rhubarb. Minute by minute the forests 
disappeared. The whole country became bare and you could see all sorts of things about its shape - all the 
little humps and hollows which you had never noticed before. The grass died. Soon Tirian found that he 
was looking at a world of bare rock and earth. You could hardly believe that anything had ever lived 
there. The monsters themselves grew old and lay down and died. Their flesh shrivelled up and the bones 
appeared: soon they were only huge skeletons that lay here and there on the dead rock, looking as if they 
had died thousands of years ago. For a long time everything was still. 

At last something white - a long, level line of whiteness that gleamed in the light of the standing stars - 
came moving towards them from the Eastern end of the world. 
A widespread noise broke the silence: first a murmur then a rumble, then a roar. And now they could see 
what it was that was coming, and how fast it came. It was a foaming wall of water. The sea was rising. In 
that tree-less world you could see it very well. You could see all the rivers getting wider and the lakes 
getting larger, and separate lakes joining into one, and valleys turning into new lakes, and hills turning 
into islands, and then those islands vanishing. And the high moors to their left and the higher mountains 
to their right crumbled and slipped down with a roar and a splash into the mounting water; and the water 
came swirling up to the very threshold of the Doorway (but never passed it) so that the foam splashed 
about Aslan's forefeet. All now was level water from where they stood to where the waters met the sky. 
And out there it began to grow light. A streak of dreary and disastrous dawn spread along the horizon, 
and widened and grew brighter, till in the end they hardly noticed the light of the stars who stood behind 
them. At last the sun came up. When it did, the Lord Digory and the Lady Polly looked at one another and 
gave a little nod: those two, in a different world, had once seen a dying sun, and so they knew at once that 
this sun also was dying. It was three times - twenty times - as big as it ought to be, and very dark red. As 
its rays fell upon the great Time-giant, he turned red too: and in the reflection of that sun the whole waste 
of shoreless waters looked like blood. 
Then the Moon came up, quite in her wrong position, very close to the sun, and she also looked red. And 
at the sight of her the sun began shooting out great flames, like whiskers or snakes of crimson fire, 
towards her. It is as if he were an octopus trying to draw her to himself in his tentacles. And perhaps he 
did draw her. At any rate she came to him, slowly at first, but then more and more quickly, till at last his 
long flames licked round her and the two ran together and became one huge ball like a burning coal. Great 
lumps of fire came dropping out of it into the sea and clouds of steam rose up. 
Then Aslan said, "Now make an end." 
The giant threw his horn into the sea. Then he stretched out one arm - very black it looked, and thousands 
of miles long - across the sky till his hand reached the Sun. He took the Sun and squeezed it in his hand as 
you would squeeze an orange. And instantly there was total darkness. 
Everyone except Aslan jumped back from the ice-cold air which now blew through the Doorway. Its 
edges were already covered with icicles. 

"Peter, High King of Narnia," said Aslan. "Shut the Door." 
Peter, shivering with cold, leaned out into the darkness and pulled the Door to. It scraped over ice as he 
pulled it. Then, rather clumsily (for even in that moment his hands had gone numb and blue) he took out a 
golden key and locked it. 
They had seen strange things enough through that Doorway. But it was stranger than any of them to look 
round and find themselves in warm daylight, the blue sky above them, flowers at their feet, and laughter 
in Aslan's eyes. 
He turned swiftly round, crouched lower, lashed himself with his tail and shot away like a golden arrow. 
"Come further in! Come further up!" he shouted over his shoulder. But who could keep up with him at 
that pace? They set out walking Westward to follow him. 
"So," said Peter, "night falls on Narnia. What, Lucy! You're not crying? With Aslan ahead, and all of us 
here?" 
"Don't try to stop me, Peter," said Lucy, "I am sure Aslan would not. I am sure it is not wrong to mourn 
for Narnia. Think of all that lies dead and frozen behind that door." 
"Yes and I did hope," said Jill, "that it might go on for ever. I knew our world couldn't. I did think Narnia 
might." 
"I saw it begin," said the Lord Digory. "I did not think I would live to see it die." 
"Sirs," said Tirian. "The ladies do well to weep. See, I do so myself. I have seen my mother's death. What 
world but Narnia have I ever known? It were no virtue, but great discourtesy, if we did not mourn." 
They walked away from the Door and away from the Dwarfs who still sat crowded together in their 

imaginary stable. And as they went they talked to one another about old wars and old peace and ancient 
Kings and all the glories of Narnia. 
The Dogs were still with them. They joined in the conversation but not much because they were too busy 
racing on ahead and racing back and rushing off to sniff at smells in the grass till they made themselves 
sneeze. Suddenly they picked up a scent which seemed to excite them very much. They all started arguing 
about it - "Yes it is - No it isn't - That's just what I said - anyone can smell what that is - Take your great 
nose out of the way and let someone else smell." 
"What is it, cousins?" said Peter. 
"A Calormene, Sire," said several Dogs at once. 
"Lead on to him, then," said Peter. "Whether he meets us in peace or war, he shall be welcome." 
The Dogs darted on ahead and came back a moment later, running as if their lives depended on it, and 
barking loudly to say that it really was a Calormene. (Talking Dogs, just like the common ones, behave as 
if they thought whatever they are doing at the moment immensely important.) 
The others followed where the Dogs led them and found a young Calormene sitting under a chestnut tree 
beside a clear stream of water. It was Emeth. He rose at once and bowed gravely. 
"Sir," he said to Peter, "I know not whether you are my friend or my foe, but I should count it my honour 
to have you for either. Has not one of the poets said that a noble friend is the best gift and a noble enemy 
the next best?" 
"Sir," said Peter, "I do not know that there need be any war between you and us." 
"Do tell us who you are and what's happened to you," said Jill. 

"If there's going to be a story, let's all have a drink and sit down," barked the Dogs. "We're quite blown." 
"Well of course you will be if you keep tearing about the way you have done," said Eustace. 
So the humans sat down on the grass. And when the Dogs had all had a very noisy drink out of the 
stream they all sat down, bolt upright, panting, with their tongues hanging out of their heads a little on one 
side to hear the story. But Jewel remained standing, polishing his horn against his side. 
"KNOW, O Warlike Kings," said Emeth, "and you, O ladies whose beauty illuminates the universe, that I 
am Emeth the seventh son of Harpha Tarkaan of the city of Tehishbaan, Westward beyond the desert. I 
came lately into Narnia with nine and twenty others under the command of Rishda Tarkaan Now when I 
first heard that we should march upon Narnia I rejoiced; for I had heard many things of your Land and 
desired greatly to meet you in battle. But when I found that we were to go in disguised as merchants 
(which is a shameful dress for a warrior and the son of a Tarkaan) and to work by lies and trickery, then 
my joy departed from me. And most of all when I found we must wait upon a Monkey, and when it began 
to be said that Tash and Aslan were one, then the world became dark in my eyes. For always since I was a 
boy I have served Tash and my great desire was to know more of him, if it might be, to look upon his 
face. But the name of Aslan was hateful to me. 
"And, as you have seen, we were called together outside the straw-roofed hovel, night after night, and the 
fire was kindled, and the Ape brought forth out of the hovel something upon four legs that I could not 
well see. And the people and the Beasts bowed down and did honour to it. But I thought, the Tarkaan is 
deceived by the Ape: for this thing that comes out of the stable is neither Tash nor any other god. But 
when I watched the Tarkaan's face, and marked every word that he said to the Monkey, then I changed my 
mind: for I saw that the Tarkaan did not believe in it himself. And then I understood that he did not 
believe in Tash at all: for if he had, how could he dare to mock him? 

"When I understood this, a great rage fell upon me and I wondered that the true Tash did not strike down 
both the Monkey and the Tarkaan with fire from heaven. Nevertheless I hid my anger and held my tongue 
and waited to see how it would end. But last night, as some of you know, the Monkey brought not forth 
the yellow thing but said that all who desired to look upon Tashlan - for so they mixed the two words to 
pretend that they were all one - must pass one by one into the hovel. And I said to myself, Doubtless this 
is some other deception. But when the Cat had followed in and had come out again in a madness of terror, 
then I said to myself, Surely the true Tash, whom they called on without knowledge or belief, has now 
come among us, and will avenge himself. And though my heart was turned into water inside me because 
of the greatness and terror of Tash, yet my desire was stronger than my fear, and I put force upon my 
knees to stay them from trembling, and on my teeth that they should not chatter, and resolved to look 
upon the face of Tash though he should slay me. So I offered myself to go into the hovel; and the 
Tarkaan, though unwillingly, let me go. 
"As soon as I had gone in at the door, the first wonder was that I found myself in this great sunlight (as 
we all are now) though the inside of the hovel had looked dark from outside. But I had no time to marvel 
at this, for immediately I was forced to fight for my head against one of our own men. As soon as I saw 
him I understood that the Monkey and the Tarkaan had set him there to slay any who came in if he were 
not in their secrets: so that this man also was a liar and a mocker and no true servant of Tash. I had the 
better will to fight him; and having slain the villain, I cast him out behind me through the door. 
"Then I looked about me and saw the sky and the wide lands, and smelled the sweetness. And I said, By 
the Gods, this is a pleasant place: it may be that I am come into the country of Tash. And I began to 
journey into the strange country and to seek him. 
"So I went over much grass and many flowers and among all kinds of wholesome and delectable trees till 
lo! in a narrow place between two rocks there came to meet me a great Lion. The speed of him was like 
the ostrich, and his size was an elephant's; his hair was like pure gold and the brightness of his eyes like 
gold that is liquid in the furnace. He was more terrible than the Flaming Mountain of Lagour, and in 
beauty he surpassed all that is in the world even as the rose in bloom surpasses the dust of the desert. 
Then I fell at his feet and thought, Surely this is the hour of death, for the Lion (who is worthy of all 
honour) will know that I have served Tash all my days and not him. Nevertheless, it is better to see the 
Lion and die than to be Tisroc of the world and live and not to have seen him. But the Glorious One bent 
down his golden head and touched my forehead with his tongue and said, Son, thou art welcome. But I 
said, Alas, Lord, I am no son of thine but the servant of Tash. He answered, Child, all the service thou 
hast done to Tash, I account as service done to me. Then by reasons of my great desire for wisdom and 
understanding, I overcame my fear and questioned the Glorious One and said, Lord, is it then true, as the 
Ape said, that thou and Tash are one? The Lion growled so that the earth shook (but his wrath was not 
against me) and said, It is false. Not because he and I are one, but because we are opposites, I take to me 
the services which thou hast done to him. For I and he are of such different kinds that no service which is 
vile can be done to me, and none which is not vile can be done to him. Therefore if any man swear by 
Tash and keep his oath for the oath's sake, it is by me that he has truly sworn, though he know it not, and 
it is I who reward him. And if any man do a cruelty in my name, then, though he says the name Aslan, it 
is Tash whom he serves and by Tash his deed is accepted. Dost thou understand, Child? I said, Lord, thou 
knowest how much I understand. But I said also (for the truth constrained me), Yet I have been seeking 

Tash all my days. Beloved, said the Glorious One, unless thy desire had been for me thou wouldst not 
have sought so long and so truly. For all find what they truly seek. 
"Then he breathed upon me and took away the trembling from my limbs and caused me to stand upon my 
feet. And after that, he said not much, but that we should meet again, and I must go further up and further 
in. Then he turned him about in a storm and flurry of gold and was gone suddenly. 
"And since then, O Kings and Ladies, I have been wandering to find him and my happiness is so great 
that it even weakens me like a wound. And this is the marvel of marvels, that he called me Beloved, me 
who am but as a dog -" 
"Eh? What's that?" said one of the Dogs. 
"Sir," said Emeth. "It is but a fashion of speech which we have in Calormen." 
"Well, I can't say it's one I like very much," said the Dog. 
"He doesn't mean any harm," said an older Dog. 
"After all, we call our puppies Boys when they don't behave properly." 
"So we do," said the first Dog. "Or girls." 
"S-s-sh!" said the Old Dog. "That's not a nice word to use. Remember where you are." 
"Look!" said Jill suddenly. Someone was coming, rather timidly, to meet them; a graceful creature on 
four feet, all silvery-grey. And they stared at him for a whole ten seconds before five or six voices said all 
at once, "Why, it's old Puzzle!" They had never seen him by daylight with the lion-skin off, and it made 
an extraordinary difference. He was himself now: a beautiful donkey with such a soft, grey coat and such 
a gentle, honest face that if you had seen him you would have done just what Jill and Lucy did - rushed 

forward and put your arms round his neck and kissed his nose and stroked his ears. 
When they asked him where he had been he said he had come in at the door along with all the other 
creatures but he had - well, to tell the truth, he had been keeping out of their way as much as he could; and 
out of Aslan's way. For the sight of the real Lion had made him so ashamed of all that nonsense about 
dressing up in a lion-skin that he did not know how to look anyone in the face. But when he saw that all 
his friends were going away Westward, and after he had had a mouthful of grass ("And I've never tasted 
such good grass in my life," said Puzzle), he plucked up his courage and followed. "But what I'll do if I 
really have to meet Aslan, I'm sure I don't know," he added. 
"You'll find it will be all right when you really do," said Queen Lucy. 
Then they went forward together, always Westward, for that seemed to be the direction Aslan had meant 
when he cried out, "Further up and futher in." Many other creatures were slowly moving the same way, 
but that grassy country was very wide and there was no crowding. 
It still seemed to be early, and the morning freshness was in the air. They kept on stopping to look round 
and to look behind them, partly because it was so beautiful but partly also because there was something 
about it which they could not understand. 
"Peter," said Lucy, "where is this, do you suppose?" 
"I don't know," said the High King. "It reminds me of somewhere but I can't give it a name. Could it be 
somewhere we once stayed for a holiday when we were very, very small?" 
"It would have to have been a jolly good holiday," said Eustace. "I bet there isn't a country like this 
anywhere in our world. Look at the colours! You couldn't get a blue like the blue on those mountains in 
our world." 
"Is it not Aslan's country?" said Tirian. 
"Not like Aslan's country on top of that mountain beyond the Eastern end of the world," said Jill. "I've 

been there." 
"If you ask me," said Edmund, "it's like somewhere in the Narnian world. Look at those mountains ahead 
- and the big ice-mountains beyond them. Surely they're rather like the mountains we used to see from 
Narnia, the ones up Westward beyond the Waterfall?" 
"Yes, so they are," said Peter. "Only these are bigger." 
"I don't think those ones are so very like anything in Narnia," said Lucy. "But look there." She pointed 
Southward to their left, and everyone stopped and turned to look. "Those hills," said Lucy, "the nice 
woody ones and the blue ones behind - aren't they very like the Southern border of Narnia?" 
"Like!" cried Edmund after a moment's silence. "Why, they're exactly like. Look, there's Mount Pire with 
his forked head, and there's the pass into Archenland and everything!" 
"And yet they're not like," said Lucy. "They're different. They have more colours on them and they look 
further away than I remembered and they're more .. . more . . . oh, I don't know..." 
"More like the real thing," said the Lord Digory softly. 
Suddenly Farsight the Eagle spread his wings, soared thirty or forty feet up into the air, circled round and 
then alighted on the ground. 
"Kings and Queens," he cried, "we have all been blind. We are only beginning to see where we are. From 
up there I have seen it all - Ettinsmuir, Beaversdam, the Great River, and Cair Paravel still shining on the 
edge of the Eastern Sea. Narnia is not dead. This is Narnia." 
"But how can it be?" said Peter. "For Aslan told us older ones that we should never return to Narnia, and 
here we are." 

"Yes," said Eustace. "And we saw it all destroyed and the sun put out." 
"And it's all so different," said Lucy. 
"The Eagle is right," said the Lord Digory. "Listen, Peter. When Aslan said you could never go back to 
Narnia, he meant the Narnia you were thinking of. But that was not the real Narnia. That had a beginning 
and an end. It was only a shadow or a copy of the real Narnia which has always been here and always will 
be here: just as our world, England and all, is only a shadow or copy of something in Aslan's real world. 
You need not mourn over Narnia, Lucy. All of the old Narnia that mattered, all the dear creatures, have 
been drawn into the real Narnia through the Door. And of course it is different; as different as a real thing 
is from a shadow or as waking life is from a dream." His voice stirred everyone like a trumpet as he spoke 
these words: but when he added under his breath "It's all in Plato, all in Plato: bless me, what do they 
teach them at these schools!" the older ones laughed. It was so exactly like the sort of thing they had heard 
him say long ago in that other world where his beard was grey instead of golden. He knew why they were 
laughing and joined in the laugh himself. But very quickly they all became grave again: for, as you know, 
there is a kind of happiness and wonder that makes you serious. It is too good to waste on jokes. 
It is as hard to explain how this sunlit land was different from the old Narnia as it would be to tell you 
how the fruits of that country taste. Perhaps you will get some idea of it if you think like this. You may 
have been in a room in which there was a window that looked out on a lovely bay of the sea or a green 
valley that wound away among mountains. And in the wall of that room opposite to the window there 
may have been a lookingglass. And as you turned away from the window you suddenly caught sight of 
that sea or that valley, all over again, in the looking glass. And the sea in the mirror, or the valley in the 
mirror, were in one sense just the same as the real ones: yet at the same time they were somehow different 
- deeper, more wonderful, more like places in a story: in a story you have never heard but very much want 
to know. The difference between the old Narnia and the new Narnia was like that. The new one was a 
deeper country: every rock and flower and blade of grass looked as if it meant more. I can't describe it any 
better than that: if ever you get there you will know what I mean. 
It was the Unicorn who summed up what everyone was feeling. He stamped his right fore-hoof on the 
ground and neighed, and then cried: 
"I have come home at last! This is my real country! I belong here. This is the land I have been looking for 
all my life, though I never knew it till now. The reason why we loved the old Narnia is that it sometimes 
looked a little like this. Bree-hee-hee! Come further up, come further in!" 
He shook his mane and sprang forward into a great gallop - a Unicorn's gallop, which, in our world, 
would have carried him out of sight in a few moments. But now a most strange thing happened. Everyone 

else began to run, and they found, to their astonishment, that they could keep up with him: not only the 
Dogs and the humans but even fat little Puzzle and short-legged Poggin the Dwarf. The air flew in their 
faces as if they were driving fast in a car without a windscreen. The country flew past as if they were 
seeing it from the windows of an express train. Faster and faster they raced, but no one got hot or tired or 
out of breath. 
IF one could run without getting tired, I don't think one would often want to do anything else. But there 
might be special reasons for stopping, and it was a special reason which made Eustace presently shout: 
"I say! Steady! Look what we're coming to!" 
And well he might. For now they saw before them Caldron Pool and beyond the Pool the high 
unclimbable cliffs and, pouring down the cliffs, thousands of tons of water every second, flashing like 
diamonds in some places and dark, glassy green in others, the Great Waterfall; and already the thunder of 
it was in their ears. 
"Don't stop! Further up and further in," called Farsight, tilting his flight a little upwards. 
"It's all very well for him," said Eustace, but Jewel also cried out: 
"Don't stop. Further up and further in! Take it in your stride." 
His voice could only just be heard above the roar of the water but next moment everyone saw that he had 

plunged into the Pool. And helter-skelter behind him, with splash after splash, all the others did the same. 
The water was not biting cold as all of them (and especially Puzzle) expected, but of a delicious foamy 
coolness. They all found they were swimming straight for the Waterfall itself. 
"This is absolutely crazy," said Eustace to Edmund. 
"I know. And yet -" said Edmund. 
"Isn't it wonderful?" said Lucy. "Have you noticed one can't feel afraid, even if one wants to? Try it." 
"By Jove, neither one can," said Eustace after he had tried. 
Jewel reached the foot of the Waterfall first, but Tirian was only just behind him. Jill was last, so she 
could see the whole thing better than the others. She saw something white moving steadily up the face of 
the Waterfall. That white thing was the Unicorn. You couldn't tell whether he was swimming or climbing, 
but he moved on, higher and higher. The point of his horn divided the water just above his head, and it 
cascaded out in two rainbow-coloured streams all round his shoulders. Just behind him came King Tirian. 
He moved his legs and arms as if he were swimming but he moved straight upwards: as if one could swim 
up the wall of a house. 
What looked funniest was the Dogs. During the gallop they had not been at all out of breath, but now, as 
they swarmed and wriggled upwards, there was plenty of spluttering and sneezing among them; that was 
because they would keep on barking, and every time they barked they got their mouths and noses full of 
water. But before Jill had time to notice all these things fully, she was going up the Waterfall herself. It 
was the sort of thing that would have been quite impossible in our world. Even if you hadn't been 
drowned, you would have been smashed to pieces by the terrible weight of water against the countless 
jags of rock. But in that world you could do it. You went on, up and up, with all kinds of reflected lights 
flashing at you from the water and all manner of coloured stones flashing through it, till it seemed as if 
you were climbing up light itself - and always higher and higher till the sense of height would have 
terrified you if you could be terrified, but later it was only gloriously exciting. And then at last one came 
to the lovely, smooth green curve in which the water poured over the top and found that one was out on 
the level river above the Waterfall. The current was racing away behind you, but you were such a 
wonderful swimmer that you could make headway against it. Soon they were all on the bank, dripping 
buthappy. 
A long valley opened ahead and great snow-mountains, now much nearer, stood up against the sky. 

"Further up and further in," cried Jewel and instantly they were off again. 
They were out of Narnia now and up into the Western Wild which neither Tirian nor Peter nor even the 
Eagle had ever seen before. But the Lord Digory and the Lady Polly had. "Do you remember? Do you 
remember?" they said - and said it in steady voices too, without panting, though the whole party was now 
running faster than an arrow flies. 
"What, Lord?" said Tirian. "Is it then true, as stories tell, that you two journeyed here on the very day the 
world was made?" 
"Yes," said Digory, "and it seems to me as if it were only yesterday." 
"And on a flying horse?" asked Tirian. "Is that part true?" 
"Certainly," said Digory. But the Dogs barked, "Faster, faster!" 
So they ran faster and faster till it was more like flying than running, and even the Eagle overhead was 
going no faster than they. And they went through winding valley after winding valley and up the steep 
sides of hills and, faster than ever, down the other side, following the river and sometimes crossing it and 
skimming across mountainlakes as if they were living speed-boats, till at last at the far end of one long 
lake which looked as blue as a turquoise, they saw a smooth green hill. Its sides were as steep as the sides 
of a pyramid and round the very top of it ran a green wall: but above the wall rose the branches of trees 
whose leaves looked like silver and their fruit like gold. 
"Further up and further in!" roared the Unicorn, and no one held back. They charged straight at the foot 
of the hill and then found themselves running up it almost as water from a broken wave runs up a rock out 
at the point of some bay. Though the slope was nearly as steep as the roof of a house and the grass was 
smooth as a bowling green, no one slipped. Only when they had reached the very top did they slow up; 
that was because they found themselves facing great golden gates. And for a moment none of them was 
bold enough to try if the gates would open. They all felt just as they had felt about the fruit "Dare we? Is it 
right? Can it be meant for us?" 

But while they were standing thus a great horn, wonderfully loud and sweet, blew from somewhere 
inside that walled garden and the gates swung open. 
Tirian stood holding his breath and wondering who would come out. And what came was the last thing 
he had expected: a little, sleek, bright-eyed Talking Mouse with a red feather stuck in a circlet on its head 
and its left paw resting on a long sword. It bowed, a most beautiful bow, and said in its shrill voice: 
"Welcome, in the Lion's name. Come further up and further in." 
Then Tirian saw King Peter and King Edmund and Queen Lucy rush forward to kneel down and greet the 
Mouse and they all cried out "Reepicheep!" And Tirian breathed fast with the sheer wonder of it, for now 
he knew that he was looking at one of the great heroes of Narnia, Reepicheep the Mouse who had fought 
at the great Battle of Beruna and afterwards sailed to the World's end with King Caspian the Seafarer. But 
before he had had much time to think of this he felt two strong arms thrown about him and felt a bearded 
kiss on his cheeks and heard a well remembered voice saying: 
"What, lad? Art thicker and taller since I last touched thee!" 
It was his own father, the good King Erlian: but not as Tirian had seen him last when they brought him 
home pale and wounded from his fight with the giant, nor even as Tirian remembered him in his later 
years when he was a grey-headed warrior. This was his father, young and merry, as he could just 
remember him from very early days when he himself had been a little boy playing games with his father 
in the castle garden at Cair Paravel, just before bedtime on summer evenings. The very smell of the breadand-
milk he used to have for supper came back to him. 
Jewel thought to himself, "I will leave them to talk for a little and then I will go and greet the good King 
Erlian. Many a bright apple has he given me when I was but a colt." But next moment he had something 
else to think of, for out of the gateway there came a horse so mighty and noble that even a Unicorn might 
feel shy in its presence: a great winged horse. It looked a moment at the Lord Digory and the Lady Polly 
and neighed out "What, cousins!" and they both shouted "Fledge! Good old Fledge!" and rushed to kiss it. 
But by now the Mouse was again urging them to come in. So all of them passed in through the golden 
gates, into the delicious smell that blew towards them out of that garden and into the cool mixture of 
sunlight and shadow under the trees, walking on springy turf that was all dotted with white flowers. The 
very first thing which struck everyone was that the place was far larger than it had seemed from outside. 

But no one had time to think about that for people were coming up to meet the newcomers from every 
direction. 
Everyone you had ever heard of (if you knew the history of these countries) seemed to be there. There 
was Glimfeather the Owl and Puddleglum the Marshwiggle, and King Rilian the Disenchanted, and his 
mother the Star's daughter and his great father Caspian himself. And close beside him were the Lord 
Drinian and the Lord Berne and Trumpkin the Dwarf and Truffle-hunter the good Badger with Glenstorm 
the Centaur and a hundred other heroes of the great War of Deliverance. And then from another side came 
Cor the King of Archenland with King Lune his father and his wife Queen Aravis and the brave prince 
Corin Thunder-Fist, his brother, and Bree the Horse and Hwin the Mare. And then - which was a wonder 
beyond all wonders to Tirian - there came from further away in the past, the two good Beavers and 
Tumnus the Faun. And there was greeting and kissing and hand-shaking and old jokes revived, (you've no 
idea how good an old joke sounds when you take it out again after a rest of five or six hundred years) and 
the whole company moved forward to the centre of the orchard where the Phoenix sat in a tree and looked 
down upon them all, and at the foot of that tree were two thrones and in those two thrones a King and 
Queen so great and beautiful that everyone bowed down before them. And well they might, for these two 
were King Frank and Queen Helen from whom all the most ancient Kings of Narnia and Archenland are 
descended. And Tirian felt as you would feel if you were brought before Adam and Eve in all their glory. 
About half an hour later - or it might have been half a hundred years later, for time there is not like time 
here - Lucy stood with her dear friend, her oldest Narnian friend, the Faun Tumnus, looking down over 
the wall of that garden, and seeing all Narnia spread out below. But when you looked down you found 
that this hill was much higher than you had thought: it sank down with shining cliffs, thousands of feet 
below them and trees in that lower world looked no bigger than grains of green salt. Then she turned 
inward again and stood with her back to the wall and looked at the garden. 
"I see," she said at last, thoughtfully. "I see now. This garden is like the stable. It is far bigger inside than 
it was outside." 
"Of course, Daughter of Eve," said the Faun. "The further up and the further in you go, the bigger 
everything gets. The inside is larger than the outside." 
Lucy looked hard at the garden and saw that it was not really a garden but a whole world, with its own 
rivers and woods and sea and mountains. But they were not strange: she knew them all. 
"I see," she said. "This is still Narnia, and more real and more beautiful then the Narnia down below, just 
as it was more real and more beautiful than the Narnia outside the stable door! I see... world within world, 
Narnia within Narnia..." 

"Yes," said Mr Tumnus, "like an onion: except that as you go in and in, each circle is larger than the 
last." 
And Lucy looked this way and that and soon found that a new and beautiful thing had happened to her. 
Whatever she looked at, however far away it might be, once she had fixed her eyes steadily on it, became 
quite clear and close as if she were looking through a telescope. She could see the whole Southern desert 
and beyond it the great city of Tashbaan: to Eastward she could see Cair Paravel on the edge of the sea 
and the very window of the room that had once been her own. And far out to sea she could discover the 
islands, islands after islands to the end of the world, and, beyond the end, the huge mountain which they 
had called Aslan's country. But now she saw that it was part of a great chain of mountains which ringed 
round the whole world. In front of her it seemed to come quite close. Then she looked to her left and saw 
what she took to be a great bank of brightly-coloured cloud, cut off from them by a gap. But she looked 
harder and saw that it was not a cloud at all but a real land. And when she had fixed her eyes on one 
particular spot of it, she at once cried out, "Peter! Edmund! Come and look! Come quickly." And they 
came and looked, for their eyes also had become like hers. 
"Whys" exclaimed Peter. "It's England. And that's the house itself - Professor Kirk's old home in the 
country where all our adventures began!" 
"I thought that house had been destroyed," said Edmund. 
"So it was," said the Faun. "But you are now looking at the England within England, the real England just 
as this is the real Narnia. And in that inner England no good thing is destroyed." 
Suddenly they shifted their eyes to another spot, and then Peter and Edmund and Lucy gasped with 
amazement and shouted out and began waving: for there they saw their own father and mother, waving 
back at them across the great, deep valley. It was like when you see people waving at you from the deck 
of a big ship when you are waiting on the quay to meet them. 
"How can we get at them?" said Lucy. 
"That is easy," said Mr Tumnus. "That country and this country - all the real countries - are only spurs 
jutting out from the great mountains of Aslan. We have only to walk along the ridge, upward and inward, 

till it joins on. And listen! There is King Frank's horn: we must all go up." 
And soon they found themselves all walking together and a great, bright procession it was - up towards 
mountains higher than you could see in this world even if they were there to be seen. But there was no 
snow on those mountains: there were forests and green slopes and sweet orchards and flashing waterfalls, 
one above the other, going up forever. And the land they were walking on grew narrower all the time, 
with a deep valley on each side: and across that valley the land which was the real England grew nearer 
and nearer. 
The light ahead was growing stronger. Lucy saw that a great series of many-coloured cliffs led up in front 
of them like a giant's staircase. And then she forgot everything else, because Aslan himself was coming, 
leaping down from cliff to cliff like a living cataract of power and beauty. 
And the very first person whom Aslan called to him was Puzzle the Donkey. You never saw a donkey 
look feebler and sillier than Puzzle did as he walked up to Aslan, and he looked, beside Aslan, as small as 
a kitten looks beside a St Bernard. The Lion bowed down his head and whispered something to Puzzle at 
which his long ears went down, but then he said something else at which the ears perked up again. The 
humans couldn't hear what he had said either time. Then Aslan turned to them and said: 
"You do not yet look so happy as I mean you to be." 
Lucy said, "We're so afraid of being sent away, Aslan. And you have sent us back into our own world so 
often." 
"No fear of that," said Aslan. "Have you not guessed?" 
Their hearts leaped and a wild hope rose within them. 
"There was a real railway accident," said Aslan softly. 
"Your father and mother and all of you are - as you used to call it in the Shadowlands - dead. The term is 
over: the holidays have begun. The dream is ended: this is the morning." 

And as He spoke He no longer looked to them like a lion; but the things that began to happen after that 
were so great and beautiful that I cannot write them. And for us this is the end of all the stories, and we 
can most truly say that they all lived happily ever after. But for them it was only the beginning of the real 
story. All their life in this world and all their adventures in Narnia had only been the cover and the title 
page: now at last they were beginning Chapter One of the Great Story which no one on earth has read: 
which goes on forever: in which every chapter is better than the one before. 
About this Title 
This eBook was created using ReaderWorks™Publisher Preview, produced by OverDrive, Inc. 
For more information on ReaderWorks, visit us on the Web at "www.readerworks.com" 
IT was a dull autumn day and Jill Pole was crying behind the gym. 
She was crying because they had been bullying her. This is not going to be a school story, so I shall say 
as little as possible about Jill's school, which is not a pleasant subject. It was "Co-educational," a school 
for both boys and girls, what used to be called a "mixed" school; some said it was not nearly so mixed as 
the minds of the people who ran it. These people had the idea that boys and girls should be allowed to do 
what they liked. And unfortunately what ten or fifteen of the biggest boys and girls liked best was 
bullying the others. All sorts of things, horrid things, went on which at an ordinary school would have 
been found out and stopped in half a term; but at this school they weren't. Or even if they were, the people 
who did them were not expelled or punished. The Head said they were interesting psychological cases and 
sent for them and talked to them for hours. And if you knew the right sort of things to say to the Head, the 
main result was that you became rather a favourite than otherwise. 
That was why Jill Pole was crying on that dull autumn day on the damp little path which runs between 
the back of the gym and the shrubbery. And she hadn't nearly finished her cry when a boy came round the 
corner of the gym whistling, with his hands in his pockets. He nearly ran into her. 
"Can't you look where you're going?" said Jill Pole. 
"All right," said the boy, "you needn't start -" and then he noticed her face. "I say, Pole," he said, "what's 
up?" 
Jill only made faces; the sort you make when you're trying to say something but find that if you speak 
you'll start crying again. 
"It's Them, I suppose - as usual," said the boy grimly, digging his hands farther into his pockets. 

Jill nodded. There was no need for her to say anything, even if she could have said it. They both knew. 
"Now, look here," said the boy, "there's no good us all -" 
He meant well, but he did talk rather like someone beginning a lecture. 
Jill suddenly flew into a temper (which is quite a likely thing to happen if you have been interrupted in a 
cry). 
"Oh, go away and mind your own business," she said. "Nobody asked you to come barging in, did they? 
And you're a nice person to start telling us what we all ought to do, aren't you? I suppose you mean we 
ought to spend all our time sucking up to Them, and currying favour, and dancing attendance on Them 
like you do." 
"Oh, Lor!" said the boy, sitting down on the grassy bank at the edge of the shrubbery and very quickly 
getting up again because the grass was soaking wet. His name unfortunately was Eustace Scrubb, but he 
wasn't a bad sort. 
"Pole!" he said. "Is that fair? Have I been doing anything of the sort this term? Didn't I stand up to Carter 
about the rabbit? And didn't I keep the secret about Spivvins - under torture too? And didn't I -" 
"I d-don't know and I don't care," sobbed Jill. 
Scrubb saw that she wasn't quite herself yet and very sensibly offered her a peppermint. He had one too. 
Presently Jill began to see things in a clearer light. 
"I'm sorry, Scrubb," she said presently. "I wasn't fair. You have done all that - this term." 

"Then wash out last term if you can," said Eustace. "I was a different chap then. I was - gosh! what a 
little tick I was." 
"Well, honestly, you were," said Jill. 
"You think there has been a change, then?" said Eustace. 
"It's not only me," said Jill. "Everyone's been saying so. They've noticed it. Eleanor Blakiston heard 
Adela Pennyfather talking about it in our changing room yesterday. She said, `Someone's got hold of that 
Scrubb kid. 
He's quite unmanageable this term. We shall have to attend to him next.'" 
Eustace gave a shudder. Everyone at Experiment House knew what it was like being "attended to" by 
Them. 
Both children were quiet for a moment. The drops dripped off the laurel leaves. 
"Why were you so different last term?" said Jill presently. 
"A lot of queer things happened to me in the hols," said Eustace mysteriously. 
"What sort of things?" asked Jill. 
Eustace didn't say anything for quite a long time. Then he said: 
"Look here, Pole, you and I hate this place about as much as anybody can hate anything, don't we?" 

"I know I do," said Jill. 
"Then I really think I can trust you." 
"Dam' good of you," said Jill. 
"Yes, but this is a really terrific secret. Pole, I say, are you good at believing things? I mean things that 
everyone here would laugh at?" 
"I've never had the chance," said Jill, "but I think I would be." 
"Could you believe me if I said I'd been right out of the world - outside this world - last hols?" 
"I wouldn't know what you meant." 
"Well, don't let's bother about that then. Supposing I told you I'd been in a place where animals can talk 
and where there are - er - enchantments and dragons - and well, all the sorts of things you have in fairytales." 
Scrubb felt terribly awkward as he said this and got red in the face. 
"How did you get there?" said Jill. She also felt curiously shy. 
"The only way you can - by Magic," said Eustace almost in a whisper. "I was with two cousins of mine. 
We were just - whisked away. They'd been there before." 
Now that they were talking in whispers Jill somehow felt it easier to believe. Then suddenly a horrible 
suspicion came over her and she said (so fiercely that for the moment she looked like a tigress): 

"If I find you've been pulling my leg I'll never speak to you again; never, never, never." 
"I'm not," said Eustace. "I swear I'm not. I swear by everything." 
(When I was at school one would have said, "I swear by the Bible." But Bibles were not encouraged at 
Experiment House.) 
"All right," said Jill, "I'll believe you." 
"And tell nobody?" 
"What do you take me for?" 
They were very excited as they said this. But when they had said it and Jill looked round and saw the dull 
autumn sky and heard the drip off the leaves and thought of all the hopelessness of Experiment House (it 
was a thirteen-week term and there were still eleven weeks to come) she said: 
"But after all, what's the good? We're not there: we're here. And we jolly well can't get there. Or can we?" 
"That's what I've been wondering," said Eustace. "When we came back from That Place, Someone said 
that the two Pevensie kids (that's my two cousins) could never go there again. It was their third time, you 
see. I suppose they've had their share. But he never said I couldn't. Surely he would have said so, unless 
he meant that I was to get back? And I can't help wondering, can we - could we -?" 
"Do you mean, do something to make it happen?" 
Eustace nodded. 

"You mean we might draw a circle on the ground - and write in queer letters in it - and stand inside it - 
and recite charms and spells?" 
"Well," said Eustace after he had thought hard for a bit. "I believe that was the sort of thing I was 
thinking of, though I never did it. But now that it comes to the point, I've an idea that all those circles and 
things are rather rot. I don't think he'd like them. It would look as if we thought we could make him do 
things. But really, we can only ask him." 
"Who is this person you keep on talking about?" 
"They call him Aslan in That Place," said Eustace. 
"What a curious name!" 
"Not half so curious as himself," said Eustace solemnly. "But let's get on. 
It can't do any harm, just asking. Let's stand side by side, like this. And we'll hold out our arms in front of 
us with the palms down: like they did in Ramandu's island -" 
"Whose island?" 
"I'll tell you about that another time. And he might like us to face the east. Let's see, where is the east?" 
"I don't know," said Jill. 
"It's an extraordinary thing about girls that they never know the points of the compass," said Eustace. 

"You don't know either," said Jill indignantly. 
"Yes I do, if only you didn't keep on interrupting. I've got it now. That's the east, facing up into the 
laurels. Now, will you say the words after me?'' 
"What words?" asked Jill. 
"The words I'm going to say, of course," answered Eustace. "Now -" 
And he began, "Aslan, Aslan, Aslan!" 
"Aslan, Aslan, Aslan," repeated Jill. 
"Please let us two go into -" 
At that moment a voice from the other side of the gym was heard shouting out, "Pole? Yes. I know where 
she is. She's blubbing behind the gym. Shall I fetch her out?" 
Jill and Eustace gave one glance at each other, dived under the laurels, and began scrambling up the 
steep, earthy slope of the shrubbery at a speed which did them great credit. (Owing to the curious methods 
of teaching at Experiment House, one did not learn much French or Maths or Latin or things of that sort; 
but one did learn a lot about getting away quickly and quietly when They were looking for one.) 
After about a minute's scramble they stopped to listen, and knew by the noises they heard that they were 
being followed. 
"If only the door was open again!" said Scrubb as they went on, and Jill nodded. For at the top of the 
shrubbery was a high stone wall and in that wall a door by which you could get out on to open moor. This 
door was nearly always locked. But there had been times when people had found it open; or perhaps there 
had been only one time. But you may imagine how the memory of even one time kept people hoping, and 

trying the door; for if it should happen to be unlocked it would be a splendid way of getting outside the 
school grounds without being seen. 
Jill and Eustace, now both very hot and very grubby from going along bent almost double under the 
laurels, panted up to the wall. And there was the door, shut as usual. 
"It's sure to be no good," said Eustace with his hand on the handle; and then, "O-o-oh. By Gum!!" For the 
handle turned and the door opened. 
A moment before, both of them had meant to get through that doorway in double quick time, if by any 
chance the door was not locked. But when the door actually opened, they both stood stock still. For what 
they saw was quite different from what they had expected. 
They had expected to see the grey, heathery slope of the moor going up and up to join the dull autumn 
sky. Instead, a blaze of sunshine met them. It poured through the doorway as the light of a June day pours 
into a garage when you open the door. It made the drops of water on the grass glitter like beads and 
showed up the dirtiness of Jill's tear-stained face. And the sunlight was coming from what certainly did 
look like a different world - what they could see of it. They saw smooth turf, smoother and brighter than 
Jill had ever seen before, and blue sky, and, darting to and fro, things so bright that they might have been 
jewels or huge butterflies. 
Although she had been longing for something like this, Jill felt frightened. She looked at Scrubb's face 
and saw that he was frightened too. 
"Come on, Pole," he said in a breathless voice. 
"Can we get back? Is it safe?" asked Jill. 
At that moment a voice shouted from behind, a mean, spiteful little voice. 
"Now then, Pole," it squeaked. "Everyone knows you're there. Down you come." It was the voice of 
Edith Jackle, not one of Them herself but one of their hangers-on and tale-bearers. 

"Quick!" said Scrubb. "Here. Hold hands. We mustn't get separated." And before she quite knew what 
was happening, he had grabbed her hand and pulled her through the door, out of the school grounds, out 
of England, out of our whole world into That Place. 
The sound of Edith Jackle's voice stopped as suddenly as the voice on the radio when it is switched off. 
Instantly there was a quite different sound all about them. It came from those bright things overhead, 
which now turned out to be birds. They were making a riotous noise, but it was much more like music - 
rather advanced music which you don't quite take in at the first hearing - than birds' songs ever are in our 
world. Yet, in spite of the singing, there was a sort of background of immense silence. That silence, 
combined with the freshness of the air, made Jill think they must be on the top of a very high mountain. 
Scrubb still had her by the hand and they were walking forward, staring about them on every side. Jill 
saw that huge trees, rather like cedars but bigger, grew in every direction. But as they did not grow close 
together, and as there was no undergrowth, this did not prevent one from seeing a long way into the forest 
to left and right. And as far as Jill's eye could reach, it was all the same - level turf, darting birds with 
yellow, or dragonfly blue, or rainbow plumage, blue shadows, and emptiness. There was not a breath of 
wind in that cool, bright air. It was a very lonely forest. 
Right ahead there were no trees: only blue sky. They went straight on without speaking till suddenly Jill 
heard Scrubb say, "Look out!" and felt herself jerked back. They were at the very edge of a cliff. 
Jill was one of those lucky people who have a good head for heights. She didn't mind in the least standing 
on the edge of a precipice. She was rather annoyed with Scrubb for pulling her back - "just as if I was a 
kid", she said and she wrenched her hand out of his. When she saw how very white he had turned, she 
despised him. 
"What's the matter?" she said. And to show that she was not afraid, she stood very near the edge indeed; 
in fact, a good deal nearer than even she liked. Then she looked down. 
She now realized that Scrubb had some excuse for looking white, for no cliff in our world is to be 
compared with this. Imagine yourself at the top of the very highest cliff you know. And imagine yourself 
looking down to the very bottom. And then imagine that the precipice goes on below that, as far again, ten 
times as far, twenty times as far. And when you've looked down all that distance imagine little white 
things that might, at first glance, be mistaken for sheep, but presently you realize that they are clouds - not 
little wreaths of mist but the enormous white, puffy clouds which are themselves as big as most 

mountains. And at last, in between those clouds, you get your first glimpse of the real bottom, so far away 
that you can't make out whether it's field or wood, or land or water: farther below those clouds than you 
are above them. 
Jill stared at it. Then she thought that perhaps, after all, she would step back afoot or so from the edge; 
but she didn't like to for fear of what Scrubb would think. Then she suddenly decided that she didn't care 
what he thought, and that she would jolly well get away from that horrible edge and never laugh at anyone 
for not liking heights again. But when she tried to move, she found she couldn't. Her legs seemed to have 
turned into putty. 
Everything was swimming before her eyes. 
"What are you doing, Pole? Come back-blithering little idiot!" shouted Scrubb. But his voice seemed to 
he coming from a long way off. She felt him grabbing at her. But by now she had no control over her own 
arms and legs. 
There was a moment's struggling on the cliff edge. Jill was too frightened and dizzy to know quite what 
she was doing, but two things she remembered as long as she lived (they often came back to her in 
dreams). One was that she had wrenched herself free of Scrubb's clutches; the other was that, at the same 
moment, Scrubb himself, with a terrified scream, had lost his balance and gone hurtling to the depths. 
Fortunately, she was given no time to think over what she had done. Some huge, brightly coloured 
animal had rushed to the edge of the cliff. It was lying down, leaning over, and (this was the odd thing) 
blowing. Not roaring or snorting, but just blowing from its wide-opened mouth; blowing out as steadily as 
a vacuum cleaner sucks in. Jill was lying so close to the creature that she could feel the breath vibrating 
steadily through its body. She was lying still because she couldn't get up. She was nearly fainting: indeed, 
she wished she could really faint, but faints don't come for the asking. At last she saw, far away below 
her, a tiny black speck floating away from the cliff and slightly upwards. As it rose, it also got farther 
away. By the time it was nearly on a level with the cliff-top it was so far off that she lost sight of it. It was 
obviously moving away from them at a great speed. Jill couldn't help thinking that the creature at her side 
was blowing it away. 
So she turned and looked at the creature. It was a lion. 

WITHOUT a glance at Jill the lion rose to its feet and gave one last blow. 
Then, as if satisfied with its work, it turned and stalked slowly away, back into the forest. 
"It must be a dream, it must, it must," said Jill to herself. "I'll wake up in a moment." But it wasn't, and 
she didn't. 
"I do wish we'd never come to this dreadful place," said Jill. "I don't believe Scrubb knew any more about 
it than I do. Or if he did, he had no business to bring me here without warning me what it was like. It's not 
my fault he fell over that cliff. If he'd left me alone we should both be all right." Then she remembered 
again the scream that Scrubb had given when he fell, and burst into tears. 
Crying is all right in its way while it lasts. But you have to stop sooner or later, and then you still have to 
decide what to do. When Jill stopped, she found she was dreadfully thirsty. She had been lying face 
downward, and now she sat up. The birds had ceased singing and there was perfect silence except for one 
small, persistent sound, which seemed to come from a good distance away. She listened carefully, and felt 
almost sure it was the sound of running water. 
Jill got up and looked round her very carefully. There was no sign of the lion; but there were so many 
trees about that it might easily be quite close without her seeing it. For all she knew, there might be 
several lions. But her thirst was very bad now, and she plucked up her courage to go and look for that 
running water. She went on tiptoes, stealing cautiously from tree to tree, and stopping to peer round her at 
every step. 
The wood was so still that it was not difficult to decide where the sound was coming from. It grew clearer 
every moment and, sooner than she expected, she came to an open glade and saw the stream, bright as 
glass, running across the turf a stone's throw away from her. But although the sight of the water made her 
feel ten times thirstier than before, she didn't rush forward and drink. She stood as still as if she had been 
turned into stone, with her mouth wide open. And she had a very good reason; just on this side of the 
stream lay the lion. 
It lay with its head raised and its two fore-paws out in front of it, like the lions in Trafalgar Square. She 
knew at once that it had seen her, for its eyes looked straight into hers for a moment and then turned away 

- as if it knew her quite well and didn't think much of her. 
"If I run away, it'll be after me in a moment," thought Jill. "And if I go on, I shall run straight into its 
mouth." Anyway, she couldn't have moved if she had tried, and she couldn't take her eyes off it. How long 
this lasted, she could not be sure; it seemed like hours. And the thirst became so bad that she almost felt 
she would not mind being eaten by the lion if only she could be sure of getting a mouthful of water first. 
"If you're thirsty, you may drink." 
They were the first words she had heard since Scrubb had spoken to her on the edge of the cliff. For a 
second she stared here and there, wondering who had spoken. Then the voice said again, "If you are 
thirsty, come and drink," and of course she remembered what Scrubb had said about animals talking in 
that other world, and realized that it was the lion speaking. 
Anyway, she had seen its lips move this time, and the voice was not like a man's. It was deeper, wilder, 
and stronger; a sort of heavy, golden voice. 
It did not make her any less frightened than she had been before, but it made her frightened in rather a 
different way. 
"Are you not thirsty?" said the Lion. 
"I'm dying of thirst," said Jill. 
"Then drink," said the Lion. 
"May I - could I - would you mind going away while I do?" said Jill. 
The Lion answered this only by a look and a very low growl. And as Jill gazed at its motionless bulk, she 
realized that she might as well have asked the whole mountain to move aside for her convenience. 

The delicious rippling noise of the stream was driving her nearly frantic. 
"Will you promise not to - do anything to me, if I do come?" said Jill. 
"I make no promise," said the Lion. 
Jill was so thirsty now that, without noticing it, she had come a step nearer. 
"Do you eat girls?" she said. 
"I have swallowed up girls and boys, women and men, kings and emperors, cities and realms," said the 
Lion. It didn't say this as if it were boasting, nor as if it were sorry, nor as if it were angry. It just said it. 
"I daren't come and drink," said Jill. 
"Then you will die of thirst," said the Lion. 
"Oh dear!" said Jill, coming another step nearer. "I suppose I must go and look for another stream then." 
"There is no other stream," said the Lion. 
It never occurred to Jill to disbelieve the Lion - no one who had seen his stern face could do that - and her 
mind suddenly made itself up. It was the worst thing she had ever had to do, but she went forward to the 
stream, knelt down, and began scooping up water in her hand. It was the coldest, most refreshing water 
she had ever tasted. You didn't need to drink much of it, for it quenched your thirst at once. Before she 
tasted it she had been intending to make a dash away from the Lion the moment she had finished. 

Now, she realized that this would be on the whole the most dangerous thing of all. She got up and stood 
there with her lips still wet from drinking. 
"Come here," said the Lion. And she had to. She was almost between its front paws now, looking straight 
into its face. But she couldn't stand that for long; she dropped her eyes. 
"Human Child," said the Lion. "Where is the Boy?" 
"He fell over the cliff," said Jill, and added, "Sir." She didn't know what else to call him, and it sounded 
cheek to call him nothing. 
"How did he come to do that, Human Child?" 
"He was trying to stop me from falling, Sir." 
"Why were you so near the edge, Human Child?" 
"I was showing off, Sir." 
"That is a very good answer, Human Child. Do so no more. And now" (here for the first time the Lion's 
face became a little less stern) "the boy is safe. I have blown him to Narnia. But your task will be the 
harder because of what you have done." 
"Please, what task, Sir?" said Jill. 
"The task for which I called you and him here out of your own world." 

This puzzled Jill very much. "It's mistaking me for someone else," she thought. She didn't dare to tell the 
Lion this, though she felt things would get into a dreadful muddle unless she did. 
"Speak your thought, Human Child," said the Lion. 
"I was wondering - I mean - could there be some mistake? Because nobody called me and Scrubb, you 
know. It was we who asked to come here. Scrubb said we were to call to - to Somebody - it was a name I 
wouldn't know - and perhaps the Somebody would let us in. And we did, and then we found the door 
open.’ 
"You would not have called to me unless I had been calling to you," said the Lion. 
"Then you are Somebody, Sir?" said Jill. 
"I am. And now hear your task. Far from here in the land of Narnia there lives an aged king who is sad 
because he has no prince of his blood to be king after him. He has no heir because his only son was stolen 
from him many years ago, and no one in Narnia knows where that prince went or whether he is still alive. 
But he is. I lay on you this command, that you seek this lost prince until either you have found him and 
brought him to his father's house, or else died in the attempt, or else gone back into your own world." 
"How, please?" said Jill. 
"I will tell you, Child," said the Lion. "These are the signs by which I will guide you in your quest. First; 
as soon as the Boy Eustace sets foot in Narnia, he will meet an old and dear friend. He must greet that 
friend at once; if he does, you will both have good help. Second; you must journey out of Narnia to the 
north till you come to the ruined city of the ancient giants. Third; you shall find a writing on a stone in 
that ruined city, and you must do what the writing tells you. Fourth; you will know the lost prince (if you 
find him) by this, that he will be the first person you have met in your travels who will ask you to do 
something in my name, in the name of Aslan." 
As the Lion seemed to have finished, Jill thought she should say something. 

So she said, "Thank you very much. I see." 
"Child," said Aslan, in a gentler voice than he had yet used, "perhaps you do not see quite as well as you 
think. But the first step is to remember. 
Repeat to me, in order, the four signs." 
Jill tried, and didn't get them quite right. So the Lion corrected her, and made her repeat them again and 
again till she could say them perfectly. He was very patient over this, so that, when it was done, Jill 
plucked up courage to ask: 
"Please, how am I to get to Narnia?" 
"On my breath," said the Lion. "I will blow you into the west of the world as I blew Eustace." 
"Shall I catch him in time to tell him the first sign? But I suppose it won't matter. If he sees an old friend, 
he's sure to go and speak to him, isn't he?" 
"You will have no time to spare," said the Lion. "That is why I must send you at once. Come. Walk 
before me to the edge of the cliff." 
Jill remembered very well that if there was no time to spare, that was her own fault. "If I hadn't made 
such a fool of myself, Scrubb and I would have been going together. And he'd have heard all the 
instructions as well as me," she thought. So she did as she was told. It was very alarming walking back to 
the edge of the cliff, especially as the Lion did not walk with her but behind her - making no noise on his 
soft paws. 
But long before she had got anywhere near the edge, the voice behind her said, "Stand still. In a moment 
I will blow. But, first, remember, remember, remember the signs. Say them to yourself when you wake in 
the morning and when you lie down at night, and when you wake in the middle of the night. And 
whatever strange things may happen to you, let nothing turn your mind from following the signs. And 

secondly, I give you a warning. 
Here on the mountain I have spoken to you clearly: I will not often do so down in Narnia. Here on the 
mountain, the air is clear and your mind is clear; as you drop down into Narnia, the air will thicken. Take 
great care that it does not confuse your mind. And the signs which you have learned here will not look at 
all as you expect them to look, when you meet them there. That is why it is so important to know them by 
heart and pay no attention to appearances. Remember the signs and believe the signs. Nothing else 
matters. And now, daughter of Eve, farewell -" 
The voice had been growing softer towards the end of this speech and now it faded away altogether. Jill 
looked behind her. To her astonishment she saw the cliff already more than a hundred yards behind her, 
and the Lion himself a speck of bright gold on the edge of it. She had been setting her teeth and clenching 
her fists for a terrible blast of lion's breath; but the breath had really been so gentle that she had not even 
noticed the moment at which she left the earth. And now, there was nothing but air for thousands upon 
thousands of feet below her. 
She felt frightened only for a second. For one thing, the world beneath her was so very far away that it 
seemed to have nothing to do with her. For another, floating on the breath of the Lion was so extremely 
comfortable. 
She found she could lie on her back or on her face and twist any way she pleased, just as you can in water 
(if you've learned to float really well). 
And because she was moving at the same pace as the breath, there was no wind, and the air seemed 
beautifully warm. It was not in the least like being in an aeroplane, because there was no noise and no 
vibration. If Jill had ever been in a balloon she might have thought it more like that; only better. 
When she looked back now she could take in for the first time the real size of the mountain she was 
leaving. She wondered why a mountain so huge as that was not covered with snow and ice - "but I 
suppose all that sort of thing is different in this world," thought Jill. Then she looked below her; but she 
was so high that she couldn't make out whether she was floating over land or sea, nor what speed she was 
going at. 
"By Jove! The signs!" said Jill suddenly. "I'd better repeat them." She was in a panic for a second or two, 
but she found she could still say them all correctly. "So that's all right," she said, and lay back on the air as 
if it was a sofa, with a sigh of contentment. 

"Well, I do declare," said Jill to herself some hours later, "I've been asleep. Fancy sleeping on air. I 
wonder if anyone's done it before. I don't suppose they have. Oh bother - Scrubb probably has! On this 
same journey, a little bit before me. Let's see what it looks like down below." 
What it looked like was an enormous, very dark blue plain. There were no hills to be seen; but there were 
biggish white things moving slowly across it. "Those must be clouds," she thought. "But far bigger than 
the ones we saw from the cliff. I suppose they're bigger because they're nearer. I must be getting lower. 
Bother this sun." 
The sun which had been high overhead when she began her journey was now getting into her eyes. This 
meant that it was getting lower, ahead of her. 
Scrubb was quite right in saying that Jill (I don't know about girls in general) didn't think much about 
points of the compass. Otherwise she would have known, when the sun began getting in her eyes, that she 
was travelling pretty nearly due west. 
Staring at the blue plain below her, she presently noticed that there were little dots of brighter, paler 
colour in it here and there. "It's the sea!" thought Jill. "I do believe those are islands." And so they were. 
She might have felt rather jealous if she had known that some of them were islands which Scrubb had 
seen from a ship's deck and even landed on; but she didn't know this. Then, later on, she began to see that 
there were little wrinkles on the blue flatness: little wrinkles which must be quite big ocean waves if you 
were down among them. And now, all along the horizon there was a thick dark line which grew thicker 
and darker so quickly that you could see it growing. That was the first sign she had had of the great speed 
at which she was travelling. And she knew that the thickening line must be land. 
Suddenly from her left (for the wind was in the south) a great white cloud came rushing towards her, this 
time on the same level as herself. And before she knew where she was, she had shot right into the middle 
of its cold, wet fogginess. That took her breath away, but she was in it only for a moment. She came out 
blinking in the sunlight and found her clothes wet. 
(She had on a blazer and sweater and shorts and stockings and pretty thick shoes; it had been a muddy 
sort of day in England.) She came out lower than she had gone in; and as soon as she did so she noticed 
something which, I suppose, she ought to have been expecting, but which came as a surprise and a shock. 
It was Noises. Up till then she had travelled in total silence. 

Now, for the first time, she heard the noise of waves and the crying of seagulls. And now, too, she 
smelled the smell of the sea. There was no mistake about her speed now. She saw two waves meet with a 
smack and a spout of foam go up between them; but she had hardly seen it before it was a hundred yards 
behind her. The land was getting nearer at a great pace. 
She could see mountains far inland, and other nearer mountains on her left. 
She could see bays and headlands, woods and fields, stretches of sandy beach. The sound of waves 
breaking on the shore was growing louder every second and drowning the other sea noises. 
Suddenly the land opened right ahead of her. She was coming to the mouth of a river. She was very low 
now, only a few feet above the water. A wave-top came against her toe and a great splash of foam spurted 
up, drenching her nearly to the waist. Now she was losing speed. Instead of being carried up the river she 
was gliding in to the river bank on her left. There were so many things to notice that she could hardly take 
them all in; a smooth, green lawn, a ship so brightly coloured that it looked like an enormous piece of 
jewellery, towers and battlements, banners fluttering in the air, a crowd, gay clothes, armour, gold, 
swords, a sound of music. But this was all jumbled. The first thing that she knew clearly was that she had 
alighted and was standing under a thicket of trees close by the river side, and there, only a few feet away 
from her, was Scrubb. 
The first thing she thought was how very grubby and untidy and generally unimpressive he looked. And 
the second was "How wet I am!" 
WHAT made Scrubb look so dingy (and Jill too, if she could only have seen herself) was the splendour 
of their surroundings. I had better describe them at once. 
Through a cleft in those mountains which Jill had seen far inland as she approached the land, the sunset 

light was pouring over a level lawn. On the far side of the lawn, its weather-vanes glittering in the light, 
rose a many-towered and many-turreted castle; the most beautiful castle Jill had ever seen. On the near 
side was a quay of white marble and, moored to this, the ship: a tall ship with high forecastle and high 
poop, gilded and crimson, with a great flag at the mast-head, and many banners waving from the decks, 
and a row of shields, bright as silver, along the bulwarks. The gang-plank was laid to her, and at the foot 
of it, just ready to go on board, stood an old, old man. He wore a rich mantle of scarlet which opened in 
front to show his silver mail shirt. There was a thin circlet of gold on his head. His beard, white as wool, 
fell nearly to his waist. He stood straight enough, leaning one hand on the shoulder of a richly dressed 
lord who seemed younger than himself: but you could see he was very old and frail. He looked as if a puff 
of wind could blow him away, and his eyes were watery. 
Immediately in front of the King - who had turned round to speak to his people before going on board the 
ship - there was a little chair on wheels, and, harnessed to it, a little donkey: not much bigger than a big 
retriever. In this chair sat a fat little dwarf. He was as richly dressed as the King, but because of his fatness 
and because he was sitting hunched up among cushions, the effect was quite different: it made him look 
like a shapeless little bundle of fur and silk and velvet. He was as old as the King, but more hale and 
hearty, with very keen eyes. His bare head, which was bald and extremely large, shone like a gigantic 
billiard ball in the sunset light. 
Farther back, in a half-circle, stood what Jill at once knew to be the courtiers. They were well worth 
looking at for their clothes and armour alone. As far as that went, they looked more like a flower-bed than 
a crowd. But what really made Jill open her eyes and mouth as wide as they would go, was the people 
themselves. If "people" was the right word. For only about one in every five was human. The rest were 
things you never see in our world. Fauns, satyrs, centaurs: Jill could give a name to these, for she had seen 
pictures of them. Dwarfs too. And there were a lot of animals she knew as well; bears, badgers, moles, 
leopards, mice, and various birds. 
But then they were so very different from the animals which one called by the same names in England. 
Some of them were much bigger - the mice, for instance, stood on their hind legs and were over two feet 
high. But quite apart from that, they all looked different. You could see by the expression in their faces 
that they could talk and think just as well as you could. 
"Golly!" thought Jill. "So it's true after all." But next moment she added, "I wonder are they friendly?" 
For she had just noticed, on the outskirts of the crowd, one or two giants and some people whom she 
couldn't give a name to at all. 
At that moment Aslan and the signs rushed back into her mind. She had forgotten all about them for the 
last half-hour. 

"Scrubb!" she whispered, grabbing his arm. "Scrubb, quick! Do you see anyone you know?" 
"So you've turned up again, have you?" said Scrubb disagreeably (for which he had some reason). "Well, 
keep quiet, can't you? I want to listen." 
"Don't be a fool," said Jill. "There isn't a moment to lose. Don't you see some old friend here? Because 
you've got to go and speak to him at once." 
"What are you talking about?" said Scrubb. 
"It's Aslan - the Lion - says you've got to," said Jill despairingly. "I've seen him." 
"Oh, you have, have you? What did he say?" 
"He said the very first person you saw in Narnia would be an old friend, and you'd got to speak to him at 
once." 
"Well, there's nobody here I've ever seen in my life before; and anyway, I don't know whether this is 
Narnia." 
"Thought you said you'd been here before," said Jill. 
"Well, you thought wrong then." 
"Well, I like that! You told me -" 
"For heaven's sake dry up and let's hear what they're saying." 

The King was speaking to the Dwarf, but Jill couldn't hear what he said. 
And, as far as she could make out, the Dwarf made no answer, though he nodded and wagged his head a 
great deal. Then the King raised his voice and addressed the whole court: but his voice was so old and 
cracked that she could understand very little of his speech - especially since it was all about people and 
places she had never heard of. When the speech was over, the King stooped down and kissed the Dwarf 
on both cheeks, straightened himself, raised his right hand as if in blessing, and went, slowly and with 
feeble steps, up the gangway and on board the ship. The courtiers appeared to be greatly moved by his 
departure. Handkerchiefs were got out, sounds of sobbing were heard in every direction. The gangway 
was cast off, trumpets sounded from the poop, and the ship moved away from the quay. (It was being 
towed by a rowing-boat, but Jill didn't see that.) 
"Now -" said Scrubb, but he didn't get any farther, because at that moment a large white object - Jill 
thought for a second that it was a kite - came gliding through the air and alighted at his feet. It was a white 
owl, but so big that it stood as high as a good-sized dwarf. 
It blinked and peered as if it were short-sighted, and put its head a little on one side, and said in a soft, 
hooting kind of voice: 
"Tu-whoo, tu-whoo! Who are you two?" 
"My name's Scrubb, and this is Pole," said Eustace. "Would you mind telling us where we are?" 
"In the land of Narnia, at the King's castle of Cair Paravel." 
"Is that the King who's just taken ship?" 
"Too true, too true," said the Owl sadly, shaking its big head. "But who are you? There's something 
magic about you two. I saw you arrive: you flew. 

Everyone else was so busy seeing the King off that nobody knew. Except me. 
I happened to notice you, you flew." 
"We were sent here by Aslan," said Eustace in a low voice. 
"Tu-whoo, tu-whoo!" said the Owl, ruffling out its feathers. "This is almost too much for me, so early in 
the evening. I'm not quite myself till the sun's down." 
"And we've been sent to find the lost Prince," said Jill, who had been anxiously waiting to get into the 
conversation. 
"It's the first I've heard about it," said Eustace. "What prince?" 
"You had better come and speak to the Lord Regent at once," it said. 
"That's him, over there in the donkey carriage; Trumpkin the Dwarf." The bird turned and began leading 
the way, muttering to itself, "Whoo! Tu-whoo! What a to-do! I can't think clearly yet. It's too early." 
"What is the King's name?" asked Eustace. 
"Caspian the Tenth," said the Owl. And Jill wondered why Scrubb had suddenly pulled up short in his 
walk and turned an extraordinary colour. 
She thought she had never seen him look so sick about anything. But before she had time to ask any 
questions they had reached the dwarf, who was just gathering up the reins of his donkey and preparing to 
drive back to the castle. The crowd of courtiers had broken up and were going in the same direction, by 
ones and twos and little knots, like people coming away from watching a game or a race. 

"Tu-whoo! Ahem! Lord Regent," said the Owl, stooping down a little and holding its beak near the 
Dwarf's ear. 
"Heh? What's that?" said the Dwarf. 
"Two strangers, my lord," said the Owl. 
"Rangers! What d'ye mean?" said the Dwarf. "I see two uncommonly grubby man-cubs. What do they 
want?" 
"My name's Jill," said Jill, pressing forward. She was very eager to explain the important business on 
which they had come. 
"The girl's called Jill," said the Owl, as loud as it could. 
"What's that?" said the Dwarf. "The girls are all killed! I don't believe a word of it. What girls? Who 
killed 'em?" 
"Only one girl, my lord," said the Owl. "Her name is Jill." 
"Speak up, speak up," said the Dwarf. "Don't stand there buzzing and twittering in my ear. Who's been 
killed?" 
"Nobody's been killed," hooted the Owl. 
"Who?" 

"NOBODY." 
"All right, all right. You needn't shout. I'm not so deaf as all that. What do you mean by coming here to 
tell me that nobody's been killed? Why should anyone have been killed?" 
"Better tell him I'm Eustace," said Scrubb. 
"The boy's Eustace, my lord," hooted the Owl as loud as it could. 
"Useless?" said the Dwarf irritably. "I dare say he is. Is that any reason for bringing him to court? Hey?" 
"Not useless," said the Owl. "EUSTACE." 
"Used to it, is he? I don't know what you're talking about, I'm sure. I tell you what it is, Master 
Glimfeather; when I was a young Dwarf there used to be talking beasts and birds in this country who 
really could talk. 
There wasn't all this mumbling and muttering and whispering. It wouldn't have been tolerated for a 
moment. Not for a moment, Sir. Urnus, my trumpet please -" 
A little Faun who had been standing quietly beside the Dwarf's elbow all this time now handed him a 
silver eartrumpet. It was made like the musical instrument called a serpent, so that the tube curled right 
round the Dwarf's neck. While he was getting it settled the Owl, Glimfeather, suddenly said to the 
children in a whisper: 
"My brain's a bit clearer now. Don't say anything about the lost Prince. 
I'll explain later. It wouldn't do, wouldn't do, Tu-Whoo! Oh what a to-do!" 

"Now," said the Dwarf, "if you have anything sensible to say, Master Glimfeather, try and say it. Take a 
deep breath and don't attempt to speak too quickly." 
With help from the children, and in spite of a fit of coughing on the part of the Dwarf, Glimfeather 
explained that the strangers had been sent by Aslan to visit the court of Narnia. The Dwarf glanced 
quickly up at them with a new expression in his eyes. 
"Sent by the Lion Himself, hey?" he said. "And from m'm - from that other Place - beyond the world's 
end, hey?" 
"Yes, my lord," bawled Eustace into the trumpet. 
"Son of Adam and Daughter of Eve, hey?" said the Dwarf. But people at Experiment House haven't heard 
of Adam and Eve, so Jill and Eustace couldn't answer this. But the Dwarf didn't seem to notice. 
"Well, my dears," he said, taking first one and then the other by the hand and bowing his head a little. 
"You are very heartily welcome. If the good King, my poor Master, had not this very hour set sail for 
Seven Isles, he would have been glad of your coming. It would have brought back his youth to him for a 
moment - for a moment. And now, it is high time for supper. 
You shall tell me your business in full council tomorrow morning. Master Glimfeather, see that 
bedchambers and suitable clothes and all else are provided for these guests in the most honourable 
fashion. And - Glimfeather - in your ear -" 
Here the Dwarf put his mouth close to the Owl's head and, no doubt, intended to whisper: but, like other 
deaf people, he wasn't a very good judge of his own voice, and both children heard him say, "See that 
they're properly washed." 
After that, the Dwarf touched up his donkey and it set off towards the castle at something between a trot 
and a waddle (it was a very fat little beast), while the Faun, the Owl, and the children followed at a rather 
slower pace. The sun had set and the air was growing cool. 

They went across the lawn and then through an orchard and so to the North Gate of Cair Paravel, which 
stood wide open. Inside, they found a grassy courtyard. Lights were already showing from the windows of 
the great hall on their right and from a more complicated mass of buildings straight ahead. Into these the 
Owl led them, and there a most delightful person was called to look after Jill. She was not much taller 
than Jill herself, and a good deal slenderer, but obviously full grown, graceful as a willow, and her hair 
was willowy too, and there seemed to be moss in it. She brought Jill to a round room in one of the turrets, 
where there was a little bath sunk in the floor and a fire of sweet-smelling woods burning on the flat 
hearth and a lamp hanging by a silver chain from the vaulted roof. The window looked west into the 
strange land of Narnia, and Jill saw the red remains of the sunset still glowing behind distant mountains. It 
made her long for more adventures and feel sure that this was only the beginning. 
When she had had her bath, and brushed her hair, and put on the clothes that had been laid out for her - 
they were the kind that not only felt nice, but looked nice and smelled nice and made nice sounds when 
you moved as well - she would have gone back to gaze out of that exciting window, but she was 
interrupted by a bang on the door. 
"Come in," said Jill. And in came Scrubb, also bathed and splendidly dressed in Narnian clothes. But his 
face didn't look as if he were enjoying it. 
"Oh, here you are at last," he said crossly, flinging himself into a chair. 
"I've been trying to find you for ever so long." 
"Well, now you have," said Jill. "I say, Scrubb, isn't it all simply too exciting and scrumptious for 
words." She had forgotten all about the signs and the lost Prince for the moment. 
"Oh! That's what you think, is it?" said Scrubb: and then, after a pause, "I wish to goodness we'd never 
come." 
"Why on earth?" 
"I can't bear it," said Scrubb. "Seeing the King Caspian - a doddering old man like that. It's - it's 

frightful." 
"Why, what harm does it do you?" 
"Oh, you don't understand. Now that I come to think of it, you couldn't. I didn't tell you that this world 
has a different time from ours." 
"How do you mean?" 
"The time you spend here doesn't take up any of our time. Do you see? I mean, however long we spend 
here, we shall still get back to Experiment House at the moment we left it -" 
"That won't be much fun." 
"Oh, dry up! Don't keep interrupting. And when you're back in England - in our world - you can't tell 
how time is going here. It might be any number of years in Narnia while we're having one year at home. 
The Pevensies explained it all to me, but, like a fool, I forgot about it. And now apparently it's been about 
seventy years Narnian years - since I was here last. Do you see now? And I come back and find Caspian 
an old, old man." 
"Then the King was an old friend of yours!" said Jill. A horrid thought had struck her. 
"I should jolly well think he was," said Scrubb miserably. "About as good a friend as a chap could have. 
And last time he was only a few years older than me. And to see that old man with a white beard, and to 
remember Caspian as he was the morning we captured the Lone Islands, or in the fight with the Sea 
Serpent - oh, it's frightful. It's worse than coming back and finding him dead." 
"Oh, shut up," said Jill impatiently. "It's far worse than you think. We've muffed the first Sign." Of course 
Scrubb did not understand this. Then Jill told him about her conversation with Aslan and the four signs 
and the task of finding the lost prince which had been laid upon them. 

"So you see," she wound up, "you did see an old friend, just as Aslan said, and you ought to have gone 
and spoken to him at once. And now you haven't, and everything is going wrong from the very 
beginning." 
"But how was I to know?" said Scrubb. 
"If you'd only listened to me when I tried to tell you, we'd be all right," said Jill. 
"Yes, and if you hadn't played the fool on the edge of that cliff and jolly nearly murdered me - all right, I 
said murder, and I'll say it again as often as I like, so keep your hair on - we'd have come together and 
both known what to do." 
"I suppose he was the first person you saw?" said Jill. "You must have been here hours before me. Are 
you sure you didn't see anyone else first?" 
"I was only here about a minute before you," said Scrubb. "He must have blown you quicker than me. 
Making up for lost time: the time you lost." 
"Don't be a perfect beast, Scrubb," said Jill. "Hallo! What's that?" 
It was the castle bell ringing for supper, and thus what looked like turning into a first-rate quarrel was 
happily cut short. Both had a good appetite by this time. 
Supper in the great hall of the castle was the most splendid thing either of them had ever seen; for though 
Eustace had been in that world before, he had spent his whole visit at sea and knew nothing of the glory 
and courtesy of the Narnians at home in their own land. The banners hung from the roof, and each course 
came in with trumpeters and kettledrums. There were soups that would make your mouth water to think 
of, and the lovely fishes called pavenders, and venison and peacock and pies, and ices and jellies and fruit 
and nuts, and all manner of wines and fruit drinks. Even Eustace cheered up and admitted that it was 
"something like". And when all the serious eating and drinking was over, a blind poet came forward and 
struck up the grand old tale of Prince Cor and Aravis and the horse Bree, which is called The Horse and 
his Boy and tells of an adventure that happened in Narnia and Calormen and the lands between, in the 
Golden Age when Peter was High King in Cair Paravel. (I haven't time to tell it now, though it is well 

worth hearing.) 
When they were dragging themselves upstairs to bed, yawning their heads off, Jill said, "I bet we sleep 
well, tonight"; for it had been a full day. 
Which just shows how little anyone knows what is going to happen to them next. 
IT is a very funny thing that the sleepier you are, the longer you take about getting to bed; especially if 
you are lucky enough to have a fire in your room. Jill felt she couldn't even start undressing unless she sat 
down in front of the fire for a bit first. And once she had sat down, she didn't want to get up again. She 
had already said to herself about five times, "I must go to bed", when she was startled by a tap on the 
window. 
She got up, pulled the curtain, and at first saw nothing but darkness. Then she jumped and started 
backwards, for something very large had dashed itself against the window, giving a sharp tap on the glass 
as. it did so. A very unpleasant idea came into her head - "Suppose they have giant moths in this country! 
Ugh!" But then the thing came back, and this time she was almost sure she saw a beak, and that the beak 
had made that tapping noise. 
"It's some huge bird," thought Jill. "Could it be an eagle?" She didn't very much want a visit even from an 
eagle, but she opened the window and looked out. Instantly, with a great whirring noise, the creature 
alighted on the window-sill and stood there filling up the whole window, so that Jill had to step back to 
make room for it. It was the Owl. 
"Hush, hush! Tu-whoo, tu-whoo," said the Owl. "Don't make a noise. Now, are you two really in earnest 
about what you've got to do?" 
"About the lost Prince, you mean?" said Jill. "Yes, we've got to be." For now she remembered the Lion's 
voice and face, which she had nearly forgotten during the feasting and story-telling in the hall. 

"Good!" said the Owl. "Then there's no time to waste. 
You must get away from here at once. I'll go and wake the other human. Then I'll come back for you. 
You'd better change those court clothes and put on something you can travel in. I'll be back in two twos. 
Tu-whoo!" And without waiting for an answer, he was gone. 
If Jill had been more used to adventures, she might have doubted the Owl's word, but this never occurred 
to her: and in the exciting idea of a midnight escape she forgot her sleepiness. She changed back into 
sweater and shorts there was a guide's knife on the belt of the shorts which might come in useful - and 
added a few of the things that had been left in the room for her by the girl with the willowy hair. She 
chose a short cloak that came down to her knees and had a hood ("just the thing, if it rains," she thought), 
a few handkerchiefs and a comb. Then she sat down and waited. 
She was getting sleepy again when the Owl returned. 
"Now we're ready," it said. 
"You'd better lead the way," said Jill. "I don't know all these passages yet." 
"Tu-whoo!" said the Owl. "We're not going through the castle. That would never do. You must ride on 
me. We shall fly." 
"Oh!" said Jill, and stood with her mouth open, not much liking the idea. 
"Shan't I be too heavy for you?" 
"Tu-whoo, tu-whoo! Don't you be a fool. I've already carried the other one. 
Now. But we'll put out that lamp first." 

As soon as the lamp was out, the bit of the night which you saw through the window looked less dark - 
no longer black, but grey. The Owl stood on the window-sill with his back to the room and raised his 
wings. Jill had to climb on to his short fat body and get her knees under the wings and grip tight. The 
feathers felt beautifully warm and soft but there was nothing to hold on by. "I wonder how Scrubb liked 
his ride!" thought Jill. And just as she was thinking this, with a horrid plunge they had left the windowsill, 
and the wings were making a flurry round her ears, and the night air, rather cool and damp, was flying 
in her face. 
It was much lighter than she expected, and though the sky was overcast, one patch of watery silver 
showed where the moon was hiding above the clouds. 
The fields beneath her looked grey, and the trees black. There was a certain amount of wind - a hushing, 
ruffling sort of wind which meant that rain was coming soon. 
The Owl wheeled round so that the castle was now ahead of them. Very few of the windows showed 
lights. They flew right over it, northwards, crossing the river: the air grew colder, and Jill thought she 
could see the white reflection of the Owl in the water beneath her. But soon they were on the north bank 
of the river, flying above wooded country. 
The Owl snapped at something which Jill couldn't see. 
"Oh, don't, please!" said Jill. "Don't jerk like that. You nearly threw me off." 
"I beg your pardon," said the Owl. "I was just nabbing a bat. There's nothing so sustaining, in a small 
way, as a nice plump little bat. Shall I catch you one?" 
"No, thanks," said Jill with a shudder. 
He was flying a little lower now and a large, black looking object was looming up towards them. Jill had 
just time to see that it was a tower - a partly ruinous tower, with a lot of ivy on it, she thought - when she 
found herself ducking to avoid the archway of a window, as the Owl squeezed with her through the ivied 

cobwebby opening, out of the fresh, grey night into a dark place inside the top of the tower. It was rather 
fusty inside and, the moment she slipped off the Owl's back, she knew (as one usually does somehow) 
that it was quite crowded And when voices began saying out of the darkness from every direction 
"Tuwhoo! Tu-whoo!" she knew it was crowded with owls. She was rather relieved when a very different 
voice said: 
"Is that you, Pole?" 
"Is that you, Scrubb?" said Jill. 
"Now," said Glimfeather, "I think we're all here. Let us hold a parliament of owls." 
"Tu-whoo, tu-whoo. True for you. That's the right thing to do," said several voices. 
"Half a moment," said Scrubb's voice. "There's something I want to say first." 
"Do, do, do," said the owls; and Jill said, "Fire ahead." 
"I suppose all you chaps-owls, I mean," said Scrubb, "I suppose you all know that King Caspian the 
Tenth, in his young days, sailed to the eastern end of the world. Well, I was with him on that journey: 
with him and Reepicheep the Mouse, and the Lord Drinian and all of them. I know it sounds hard to 
believe, but people don't grow older in our world at the same speed as they do in yours. And what I want 
to say is this, that I'm the King's man; and if this parliament of owls is any sort of plot against the King, 
I'm having nothing to do with it." 
"Tu-whoo, tu-whoo, we're all the King's owls too," said the owls. 
"What's it all about then?" said Scrubb. 
"It's only this," said Glimfeather. "That if the Lord Regent, the Dwarf Trumpkin, hears you are going to 

look for the lost Prince, he won't let you start. He'd keep you under lock and key sooner." 
"Great Scott!" said Scrubb. "You don't mean that Trumpkin is a traitor? I used to hear a lot about him in 
the old days, at sea. Caspian - the King, I mean - trusted him absolutely." 
"Oh no," said a voice. "Trumpkin's no traitor. But more than thirty champions (knights, centaurs, good 
giants, and all sorts) have at one time or another set out to look for the lost Prince, and none of them have 
ever come back. And at last the King said he was not going to have all the bravest Narnians destroyed in 
the search for his son. And now nobody is allowed to go." 
"But surely he'd let us go," said Scrubb. "When he knew who I was and who had sent me." 
("Sent both of us," put in Jill.) 
"Yes," said Glimfeather, "I think, very likely, he would. But the King's away. And Trumpkin will stick to 
the rules. He's as true as steel, but he's deaf as a post and very peppery. You could never make him see 
that this might be the time for making an exception to the rule." 
"You might think he'd take some notice of us, because we're owls and everyone knows how wise owls 
are," said someone else. "But he's so old now he'd only say, `You're a mere chick. I remember you when 
you were an egg. 
Don't come trying to teach me, Sir. Crabs and crumpets!'" 
This owl imitated Trumpkin's voice rather well, and there were sounds of owlish laughter all round. The 
children began to see that the Narnians all felt about Trumpkin as people feel at school about some crusty 
teacher, whom everyone is a little afraid of and everyone makes fun of and nobody really dislikes. 
"How long is the King going to be away?" asked Scrubb. 

"If only we knew!" said Glimfeather. "You see, there has been a rumour lately that Aslan himself has 
been seen in the islands - in Terebinthia, I think it was. And the King said he would make one more 
attempt before he died to see Aslan face to face again, and ask his advice about who is to be King after 
him. But we're all afraid that, if he doesn't meet Aslan in Terebinthia, he'll go on east, to Seven Isles and 
Lone Islands - and on and on. He never talks about it, but we all know he has never forgotten that voyage 
to the world's end. I'm sure in his heart of hearts he wants to go there again." 
"Then there's no good waiting for him to come back?" said Jill. 
"No, no good," said the Owl. "Oh, what a to-do! If only you two had known and spoken to him at once! 
He'd have arranged everything - probably given you an army to go with you in search of the Prince." 
Jill kept quiet at this and hoped Scrubb would be sporting enough not to tell all the owls why this hadn't 
happened. He was, or very nearly. That is, he only muttered under his breath, "Well, it wasn't my fault," 
before saying out loud: 
"Very well. We'll have to manage without it. But there's just one thing more I want to know. If this owls' 
parliament, as you call it, is all fair and above board and means no mischief, why does it have to be so 
jolly secret- meeting in a ruin in dead of night, and all that?" 
"Tu-whoo! Tu-whoo!" hooted several owls. "Where should we meet? When would anyone meet except at 
night?" 
"You see," explained Glimfeather, "most of the creatures in Narnia have such unnatural habits. They do 
things by day, in broad blazing sunlight (ugh!) when everyone ought to be asleep. And, as a result, at 
night they're so blind and stupid that you can't get a word out of them. So we owls have got into the habit 
of meeting at sensible hours, on our own, when we want to talk about things." 
"I see," said Scrubb. "Well now, let's get on. Tell us all about the lost Prince." Then an old owl, not 
Glimfeather, related the story. 
About ten years ago, it appeared, when Rilian, the son of Caspian, was a very young knight, he rode with 
the Queen his mother on a May morning in the north parts of Narnia. They had many squires and ladies 
with them and all wore garlands of fresh leaves on their heads, and horns at their sides; but they had no 

hounds with them, for they were maying, not hunting. In the warm part of the day they came to a pleasant 
glade where a fountain flowed freshly out of the earth, and there they dismounted and ate and drank and 
were merry. After a time the Queen felt sleepy, and they spread cloaks for her on the grassy bank, and 
Prince Rilian with the rest of the party went a little way from her, that their tales and laughter might not 
wake her. And so, presently, a great serpent came out of the thick wood and stung the Queen in her hand. 
All heard her cry out and rushed towards her, and Rilian was first at her side. He saw the worm gliding 
away from her and made after it with his sword drawn. It was great, shining, and as green as poison, so 
that he could see it well: but it glided away into thick bushes and he could not come at it. So he returned 
to his mother, and found them all busy about her. 
But they were busy in vain, for at the first glance of her face Rilian knew that no physic in the world 
would do her good. As long as the life was in her she seemed to be trying hard to tell him something. But 
she could not speak clearly and, whatever her message was, she died without delivering it. It was then 
hardly ten minutes since they had first heard her cry. 
They carried the dead Queen back to Cair Paravel, and she was bitterly mourned by Rilian and by the 
King, and by all Narnia. She had been a great lady, wise and gracious and happy, King Caspian's bride 
whom he had brought home from the eastern end of the world. And men said that the blood of the stars 
flowed in her veins. The Prince took his mother's death very hardly, as well he might. After that, he was 
always riding on the northern marches of Narnia, hunting for that venomous worm, to kill it and be 
avenged. No one remarked much on this, though the Prince came home from these wanderings looking 
tired and distraught. But about a month after the Queen's death, some said they could see a change in him. 
There was a look in his eyes as of a man who has seen visions, and though he would be out all day, his 
horse did not bear the signs of hard riding. His chief friend among the older courtiers was the Lord 
Driman, he who had been his father's captain on that great voyage to the east parts of the earth. 
One evening Drinian said to the Prince, "Your Highness must soon give over seeking the worm. There is 
no true vengeance on a witless brute as there might be on a man. You weary yourself in vain." The Prince 
answered him, "My Lord, I have almost forgotten the worm this seven days." Drinian asked him why, if 
that were so, he rode so continually in the northern woods. "My lord," said the Prince, "I have seen there 
the most beautiful thing that was ever made." "Fair Prince," said Drinian, "of your courtesy let me ride 
with you tomorrow, that I also may see this fair thing." "With a good will," said Rilian. 
Then in good time on the next day they saddled their horses and rode a great gallop into the northern 
woods and alighted at that same fountain where the Queen got her death. Drinian thought it strange that 
the Prince should choose that place of all places, to linger in. And there they rested till it came to high 
noon: and at noon Drinian looked up and saw the most beautiful lady he had ever seen; and she stood at 
the north side of the fountain and said no word but beckoned to the Prince with her hand as if she bade 
him come to her. And she was tall and great, shining, and wrapped in a thin garment as green as poison. 
And the Prince stared at her like a man out of his wits. But suddenly the lady was gone, Driman knew not 
where; and the two returned to Cair Paravel. It stuck in Drinian's mind that this shining green woman was 
evil. 

Drinian doubted very much whether he ought not to tell this adventure to the King, but he had little wish 
to be a blab and a tale-bearer and so he held his tongue. But afterwards he wished he had spoken. For next 
day Prince Rilian rode out alone. That night he came not back, and from that hour no trace of him was 
ever found in Narnia nor any neighbouring land, and neither his horse nor his hat nor his cloak nor 
anything else was ever found. Then Drinian in the bitterness of his heart went to Caspian and said, "Lord 
King, slay me speedily as a great traitor: for by my silence I have destroyed your son." And he told him 
the story. Then Caspian caught up a battle-axe and rushed upon the Lord Drinian to kill him, and Drinian 
stood still as a stock for the death blow. But when the axe was raised, Caspian suddenly threw it away and 
cried out, "I have lost my queen and my son: shall I lose my friend also?" And he fell upon the Lord 
Drinian's neck and embraced him and both wept, and their friendship was not broken. 
Such was the story of Rilian. And when it was over, Jill said, "I bet that serpent and that woman were the 
same person." 
"True, true, we think the same as you," hooted the owls. 
"But we don't think she killed the Prince," said Glimfeather, "because no bones -" 
"We know she didn't," said Scrubb. "Aslan told Pole he was still alive somewhere." 
"That almost makes it worse," said the oldest owl. "It means she has some use for him, and some deep 
scheme against Narnia. Long, long ago, at the very beginning, a White Witch came out of the North and 
bound our land in snow and ice for a hundred years. And we think this may be some of the same crew." 
"Very well, then," said Scrubb. "Pole and I have got to `Find this Prince. 
Can you help us?" 
"Have you any clue, you two?" asked Glimfeather. 

"Yes," said Scrubb. "We know we've got to go north. And w e know we've got to reach the ruins of a 
giant city." 
At this there was a greater tu-whooing than ever, and noise of birds shifting their feet and ruffling their 
feathers, and then all the owls started speaking at once. They all explained how very sorry they were that 
they themselves could not go with the children on their search for the lost Prince "You'd want to travel by 
day, and we'd want to travel by night," they said. "It wouldn't do, wouldn't do." One or two owls added 
that even here in the ruined tower it wasn't nearly so dark as it had been when they began, and that the 
parliament had been going on quite long enough. In fact, the mere mention of a journey to the ruined city 
of giants seemed to have damped the spirits of those birds. But Glimfeather said: 
"If they want to go that way - into Ettinsmoor - we must take them to one of the Marsh-wiggles. They're 
the Only people who can help them much." 
"'True, true. Do," said the owls. 
"Come on, then," said Glimfeather. "I'll take one. Who'll take the other? It must be done tonight." 
"I will: as far as the Marsh-wiggles," said another owl. 
"Are you ready?" said Glimfeather to Jill. 
"I think Pole's asleep," said Scrubb. 
JILL. was asleep. Ever since the owls' parliament began she had been yawning terribly and now she had 
dropped off. She was not at all pleased at being waked again, and at finding herself lying on bare boards 
in a dusty belfry sort of place, completely dark, and almost completely full of owls. 

She was even less pleased when she heard that they had to set off for somewhere else - and not, 
apparently, for bed - on the Owl's back. 
"Oh, come on, Pole, buck up," said Scrubb's voice. "After all, it is an adventure." 
"I'm sick of adventures," said Jill crossly. 
She did, however, consent to climb on to Glimfeather's back, and was thoroughly waked up (for a while) 
by the unexpected coldness of the air when he flew out with her into the night. The moon had disappeared 
and there were no stars. Far behind her she could see a single lighted window well above the ground; 
doubtless, in one of the towers of Cair Paravel. It made her long to be back in that delightful bedroom, 
snug in bed, watching the firelight on the walls. She put her hands under her cloak and wrapped it tightly 
round her. It was uncanny to hear two voices in the dark air a little distance away; Scrubb and his owl 
were talking to one another. "He doesn't sound tired," thought Jill. She did not realize that he had been on 
great adventures in that world before and that the Narnian air was bringing back to him a strength he had 
won when he sailed the Eastern Seas with King Caspian. 
Jill had to pinch herself to keep awake, for she knew that if she dozed on Glimfeather's back she would 
probably fall off. When at last the two owls ended their flight, she climbed stiffly off Glimfeather and 
found herself on flat ground. A chilly wind was blowing and they appeared to be in a place without trees. 
"Tu-whoo, tu-whoo!" Glimfeather was calling. "Wake up, Puddleglum. Wake up. It is on the Lion's 
business." 
For a long time there was no reply. Then, a long way off, a dim light appeared and began to come nearer. 
With it came a voice. 
"Owls ahoy!" it said. "What is it? Is the King dead? Has an enemy landed in Narnia? Is it a flood? Or 
dragons?" 
When the light reached them, it turned out to be that of a large lantern. 
She could see very little of the person who held it. He seemed to be all legs and arms. The owls were 

talking to him, explaining everything, but she was too tired to listen. She tried to wake herself up a bit 
when she realized that they were saying goodbye to her. But she could never afterwards remember much 
except that, sooner or later, she and Scrubb were stooping to enter a low doorway and then (oh, thank 
heavens) were lying down on something soft and warm, and a voice was saying: 
"There you are. Best we can do. You'll lie cold and hard. Damp too, I shouldn't wonder. Won't sleep a 
wink, most likely; even if there isn't a thunderstorm or a flood or the wigwam doesn't fall down on top of 
us all, as I've known them do. Must make the best of it -" But she was fast asleep before the voice had 
ended. 
When the children woke late next morning they found that they were lying, very dry and warm, on beds 
of straw in a dark place. A triangular opening let in the daylight. 
"Where on earth are we?" asked Jill. 
"In the wigwam of a Marsh-wiggle," said Eustace. 
"A what?" 
"A Marsh-wiggle. Don't ask me what it is. I couldn't see it last night. I'm getting up. Let's go and look for 
it." 
"How beastly one feels after sleeping in one's clothes," said Jill, sitting up. 
"I was just thinking how nice it was not to have to dress," said Eustace. 
"Or wash either, I suppose," said Jill scornfully. But Scrubb had already got up, yawned, shaken himself, 
and crawled out of the wigwam. Jill did the same. 
What they found outside was quite unlike the bit of Narnia they had seen on the day before. They were 

on a great flat plain which was cut into countless little islands by countless channels of water. The islands 
were covered with coarse grass and bordered with reeds and rushes. Sometimes there were beds of rushes 
about an acre in extent. Clouds of birds were constantly alighting in them and rising from them againduck, 
snipe, bitterns, herons. Many wigwams like that in which they had passed the night could be seen 
dotted about, but all at a good distance from one another; for Marsh-wiggles are people who like privacy. 
Except for the fringe of the forest several miles to the south and west of them, there was not a tree in 
sight. Eastward the flat marsh stretched to low sand-hills on the horizon, and you could tell by the salt 
tang in the wind which blew from that direction that the sea lay over there. To the North there were low 
pale-coloured hills, in places bastioned with rock. The rest was all flat marsh. It would have been a 
depressing place on a w et evening. Seen under a morning sun, with a fresh wind blowing, and the air 
filled with the crying of birds, there was something fine and fresh and clean about its loneliness. The 
children felt their spirits rise. 
"Where has the thingummy got to, I wonder?" said Jill. 
"The Marsh-wiggle," said Scrubb, as if he were rather proud of knowing the word. "I expect-hullo, that 
must be him." And then they both saw him, sitting with his back to them, fishing, about fifty yards away. 
He had been hard to see at first because he was nearly the same colour as the marsh and because he sat so 
still. 
"I suppose we'd better go and speak to him," said Jill. Scrubb nodded. They both felt a little nervous. 
As they drew nearer, the figure turned its head and showed them a long thin face with rather sunken 
cheeks, a tightly shut mouth, a sharp nose, and no beard. He was wearing a high, pointed hat like a 
steeple, with an enormously wide flat brim. The hair, if it could be called hair, which hung over his large 
ears was greeny-grey, and each lock was flat rather than round, so that they were like tiny reeds. His 
expression was solemn, his complexion muddy, and you could see at once that he took a serious view of 
life. 
"Good morning, Guests," he said. "Though when I say good I don't mean it won't probably turn to rain or 
it might he snow, or fog, or thunder. You didn't get any sleep, I dare say. 
"Yes we did, though," said Jill. "We had a lovely night." 
"Ah," said the Marsh-wiggle, shaking his head. "I see you're making the best of a bad job. That's right. 
You've been well brought up, you have. 

You've learned to put a good face on things." 
"Please, we don't know your name," said Scrubb. 
"Puddleglum's my name. But it doesn't matter if you forget it. I can always tell you again." 
The children sat down on each side of him. They now saw that he had very long legs and arms, so that 
although his body was not much bigger than a dwarf's, he would be taller than most men when he stood 
up. The fingers of his hands were webbed like a frog's, and so were his bare feet which dangled in the 
muddy water. He was dressed in earthcoloured clothes that hung loose about him. 
"I'm trying to catch a few eels to make an eel stew for our dinner," said Puddleglum. "Though I shouldn't 
wonder if I didn't get any. And you won't like them much if I do." 
"Why not?" asked Scrubb. 
"Why, it's not in reason that you should like our sort of victuals, though I've no doubt you'll put a bold 
face on it. All the same, while I am a catching of them, if you two could try to light the fire - no harm 
trying -! The wood's behind the wigwam. It may be wet. You could light it inside the wigwam, and then 
we'd get all the smoke in our eyes. Or you could light it outside, and then the rain would come and put it 
out. Here's my tinder-box. You won't know how to use it, I expect." 
But Scrubb had learned that sort of thing on his last adventure. The children ran back together to the 
wigwam, found the wood (which was perfectly dry) and succeeded in lighting a fire with rather less than 
the usual difficulty. Then Scrubb sat and took care of it while Jill went and had some sort of wash - not a 
very nice one - in the nearest channel. After that she saw to the fire and he had a wash. Both felt a good 
deal fresher, but very hungry. 
Presently the Marsh-wiggle joined them. In spite of his expectation of catching no eels, he had a dozen or 
so, which he had already skinned and cleaned. He put a big pot on, mended the fire, and lit his pipe. 

Marsh-wiggles smoke a very strange, heavy sort of tobacco (some people say they mix it with mud) and 
the children noticed the smoke from Puddleglum's pipe hardly rose in the air at all. It trickled out of the 
bowl and downwards and drifted along the ground like a mist. It was very black and set Scrubb coughing. 
"Now," said Puddleglum. "Those eels will take a mortal long time to cook, and either of you might faint 
with hunger before they're done. I knew a little girl - but I'd better not tell you that story. It might lower 
your spirits, and that's a thing I never do. So, to keep your minds off your hunger, we may as well talk 
about our plans." 
"Yes, do let's," said Jill. "Can you help us to find Prince Rilian?" 
The Marsh-wiggle sucked in his cheeks till they were hollower than you would have thought possible. 
"Well, I don't know that you'd call it help," he said. "I don't know that anyone can exactly help. It stands 
to reason we're not likely to get very far on a journey to the North, not at this time of the year, with the 
winter coming on soon and all. And an early winter too, by the look of things. But you mustn't let that 
make you down-hearted. Very likely, what with enemies, and mountains, and rivers to cross, and losing 
our way, and next to nothing to eat, and sore feet, we'll hardly notice the weather. And if we don't get far 
enough to do any good, we may get far enough not to get back in a hurry." 
Both children noticed that he said "we", not "you", and both exclaimed at the same moment. "Are you 
coming with us?" 
"Oh yes, I'm coming of course. Might as well, you see. I don't suppose we shall ever see the King back in 
Narnia, now that he's once set off for foreign parts; and he had a nasty cough when he left. Then there's 
Trumpkin. He's failing fast. And you'll find there'll have been a bad harvest after this terrible dry summer. 
And I shouldn't wonder if some enemy attacked us. Mark my words." 
"And how shall we start?" said Scrubb. 
"Well," said the Marsh-wiggle very slowly, "all the others who ever went looking for Prince Rilian 
started from that same fountain where the Lord Drinian saw the lady. They went north, mostly. And as 
none of them ever came back, we can't exactly say how they got on." 

"We've got to start by finding a ruined city of giants," said Jill. "Aslan said so." 
"Got to start by finding it, have we?" answered Puddleglum. "Not allowed to start by looking for it, I 
suppose?" 
"That's what I meant, of course," said Jill. "And then, when we've found it-" 
"Yes, when!" said Puddleglum very drily. 
"Doesn't anyone know where it is?" asked Scrubb. 
"I don't know about Anyone," said Puddleglum. "And I won't say I haven't heard of that Ruined City. 
You wouldn't start from the fountain, though. 
You'd have to go across Ettinsmoor. That's where the Ruined City is, if it's anywhere. But I've been as far 
in that direction as most people and I never got to any ruins, so I won't deceive you." 
"Where's Ettinsmoor?" said Scrubb. 
"Look over there northward," said Puddleglum, pointing with his pipe. "See those hills and bits of cliff? 
That's the beginning of Ettinsmoor. But there's a river between it and us; the river Shribble. No bridges, of 
course." 
"I suppose we can ford it, though," said Scrubb. 
"Well, it has been forded," admitted the Marsh-wiggle. 

"Perhaps we shall meet people on Ettinsmoor who can tell us the way," said Jill. 
"You're right about meeting people," said Puddleglum. 
"What sort of people live there?" she asked. 
"It's not for me to say they aren't all right in their own way," answered Puddleglum. "If you like their 
way." 
"Yes, but what are they?" pressed Jill. "There are so many queer creatures in this country. I mean, are 
they animals, or birds, or dwarfs, or what?" 
The Marsh-wiggle gave a long whistle. "Phew!" he said. "Don't you know? I thought the owls had told 
you. They're giants." 
Jill winced. She had never liked giants even in books, and she had once met one in a nightmare. Then she 
saw Scrubb's face, which had turned rather green, and thought to herself, "I bet he's in a worse funk than I 
am." That made her feel braver. 
"The King told me long ago," said Scrubb - "that time when I was with him at sea-that he'd jolly well 
beaten those giants in war and made them pay him tribute." 
"That's true enough," said Puddleglum. "They're at peace with us all right. 
As long as we stay on our own side of the Shribble, they won't do us any harm. Over on their side, on the 
Moor - Still, there's always a chance. If we don't get near any of them, and if none of them forget 
themselves, and if we're not seen, it's just possible we might get a long way." 
"Look here!" said Scrubb, suddenly losing his temper, as people so easily do when they have been 
frightened. "I don't believe the whole thing can be half as bad as you're making out; any more than the 

beds in the wigwam were hard or the wood was wet. I don't think Aslan would ever have sent us if there 
was so little chance as all that." 
He quite expected the Marsh-wiggle to give him an angry reply, but he only said, "That's the spirit, 
Scrubb. That's the way to talk. Put a good face on it. But we all need to be very careful about our tempers, 
seeing all the hard times we shall have to go through together. Won't do to quarrel, you know. At any rate, 
don't begin it too soon. I know these expeditions usually end that way: knifing one another, I shouldn't 
wonder, before all's done. But the longer we can keep off it-" 
"Well, if you feel it's so hopeless," interrupted Scrubb, "I think you'd better stay behind. Pole and I can go 
on alone, can't we, Pole?" 
"Shut up and don't be an ass, Scrubb," said Jill hastily, terrified lest the Marsh-wiggle should take him at 
his word. 
"Don't you lose heart, Pole," said Puddleglum. "I'm coming, sure and certain. I'm not going to lose an 
opportunity like this. It will do me good. They all say - I mean, the other wiggles all say-that I'm too 
flighty; don't take life seriously enough. If they've said it once, they've said it a thousand times. 
'Puddleglum,' they've said, `you're altogether too full of bobance and bounce and high spirits. You've got 
to learn that life isn't all fricasseed frogs and eel pie. You want something to sober you down a bit. We're 
only saying it for your own good, Puddleglum.' That's what they say. Now a job like this - a journey up 
north just as winter's beginning, looking for a Prince that probably isn't there, by way of a ruined city that 
no one has ever seen - will be just the thing. If that doesn't steady a chap, I don't know what will." And he 
rubbed his big frog-like hands together as if he were talking of going to a party or a pantomime. "And 
now," he added, "let's see how those eels are getting on." 
When the meal came it was delicious and the children had two large helpings each. At first the Marshwiggle 
wouldn't believe that they really liked it, and when they had eaten so much that he had to believe 
them, he fell back on saying that it would probably disagree with them horribly. "What's food for wiggles 
may be poison for humans, I shouldn't wonder," he said. After the meal they had tea, in tins (as you've 
seen men having it who are working on the road), and Puddleglum had a good many sips out of a square 
black bottle. He offered the children some of it, but they thought it very nasty. 
The rest of the day was spent in preparations for an early start tomorrow morning. Puddleglum, being far 
the biggest, said he would carry three blankets, with a large bit of bacon rolled up inside them. Jill was to 
carry the remains of the eels, some biscuit, and the tinder-box. Scrubb was to carry both his own cloak 
and Jill's when they didn't want to wear them. 

Scrubb (who had learned some shooting when he sailed to the East under Caspian) had Puddleglum's 
secondbest bow, and Puddleglum had his best one; though he said that what with winds, and damp 
bowstrings, and bad light, and cold fingers, it was a hundred to one against either of them hitting 
anything. He and Scrubb both had swords Scrubb had brought the one which had been left out for him in 
his room at Cair Paravel, but Jill had to be content with her knife. There would have been a quarrel about 
this, but as soon as they started sparring the wiggle rubbed his hands and said, "Ah, there you are. I 
thought as much. That's what usually happens on adventures." This made them both shut up. 
All three went to bed early in the wigwam. This time the children really had a rather bad night. That was 
because Puddleglum, after saying, "You'd better try for some sleep, you two; not that I suppose any of us 
will close an eye tonight," instantly went off into such a loud, continuous snore that, when Jill at last got 
to sleep, she dreamed all night about road-drills and waterfalls and being in express trains in tunnels. 
AT about nine o'clock next morning three lonely figures might have been seen picking their way across 
the Shribble by the shoals and stepping-stones. It was a shallow, noisy stream, and even Jill was not wet 
above her knees when they reached the northern bank. About fifty yards ahead, the land rose up to the 
beginning of the moor, everywhere steeply, and often in cliffs. 
"I suppose that's our way!" said Scrubb, pointing left and west to where a stream flowed down from the 
moor through a shallow gorge. But the Marsh-wiggle shook his head. 
"The giants mainly live along the side of that gorge," he said. "You might say the gorge was like a street 
to them. We'll do better straight ahead, even though it's a bit steep." 
They found a place where they could scramble up, and in about ten minutes stood panting at the top. 
They cast a longing look back at the valley-land of Narnia and then turned their faces to the North. The 
vast, lonely moor stretched on and up as far as they could see. On their left was rockier ground. Jill 
thought that must be the edge of the giants' gorge and did not much care about looking in that direction. 
They set out. 
It was good, springy ground for walking, and a day of pale winter sunlight. 

As they got deeper into the moor, the loneliness increased: one could hear peewits and see an occasional 
hawk. When they halted in the middle of the morning for a rest and a drink in a little hollow by a stream, 
Jill was beginning to feel that she might enjoy adventures after all, and said so. 
"We haven't had any yet," said the Marsh-wiggle. 
Walks after the first halt - like school mornings after break or railway journeys after changing trains - 
never go on as they were before. When they set out again, Jill noticed that the rocky edge of the gorge had 
drawn nearer. And the rocks were less flat, more upright, than they had been. In fact they were like little 
towers of rock. And what funny shapes they were! 
"I do believe," thought Jill, "that all the stories about giants might have come from those funny rocks. If 
you were coming along here when it was half dark, you could easily think those piles of rock were giants. 
Look at that one, now! You could almost imagine that the lump on top was a head. It would be rather too 
big for the body, but it would do well enough for an ugly giant. And all that bushy stuff - I suppose it's 
heather and birds' nests, really - would do quite well for hair and beard. And the things sticking out on 
each side are quite like ears. They'd be horribly big, but then I dare say giants would have big ears, like 
elephants. And - o-o-o-h! -" 
Her blood froze. The thing moved. It was a real giant. There was no mistaking it; she had seen it turn its 
head. She had caught a glimpse of the great, stupid, puffcheeked face. All the things were giants, not 
rocks. 
There were forty or fifty of them, all in a row; obviously standing with their feet on the bottom of the 
gorge and their elbows resting on the edge of the gorge, just as men might stand leaning on a wall - lazy 
men, on a fine morning after breakfast. 
"Keep straight on," whispered Puddleglum, who had noticed them too. "Don't look at them. And 
whatever you do, don't run. They'd be after us in a moment." 
So they kept on, pretending not to have seen the giants. It was like walking past the gate of a house where 
there is a fierce dog, only far worse. There were dozens and dozens of these giants. They didn't look angry 
- or kind or interested at all. There was no sign that they had seen the travellers. 

Then - whizz-whizz-whizz - some heavy object came hurtling through the air, and with a crash a big 
boulder fell about twenty paces ahead of them. And then - thud! - another fell twenty feet behind. 
"Are they aiming at us?" asked Scrubb. 
"No," said Puddleglum. "We'd be a good deal safer if they were. They're trying to hit that - that cairn over 
there to the right. They won't hit it, you know. It's safe enough; they're such very bad shots. They play 
cock-shies most fine mornings. About the only game they're clever enough to understand." 
It was a horrible time. There seemed no end to the line of giants, and they never ceased hurling stones, 
some of which fell extremely close. Quite apart from the real danger, the very sight and sound of their 
faces and voices were enough to scare anyone. Jill tried not to look at them. 
After about twenty-five minutes the giants apparently had a quarrel. This put an end to the cock-shies, but 
it is not pleasant to be within a mile of quarrelling giants. They stormed and jeered at one another in long, 
meaningless words of about twenty syllables each. They foamed and gibbered and jumped in their rage, 
and each jump shook the earth like a bomb. They lammed each other on the head with great, clumsy stone 
hammers; but their skulls were so hard that the hammers bounced off again, and then the monster who 
had given the blow would drop his hammer and howl with pain because it had stung his fingers. But he 
was so stupid that he would do exactly the same thing a minute later. This was a good thing in the long 
run, for by the end of an hour all the giants were so hurt that they sat down and began to cry. When they 
sat down, their heads were below the edge of the gorge, so that you saw them no more; but Jill could hear 
them howling and blubbering and boo-booing like great babies even after the place was a mile behind. 
That night they bivouacked on the bare moor, and Puddleglum showed the children how to make the best 
of their blankets by sleeping back to back. 
(The backs keep each other warm and you can then have both blankets on top.) But it was chilly even so, 
and the ground was hard and lumpy. The Marsh-wiggle told them they would feel more comfortable if 
only they thought how very much colder it would be later on and farther north; but this didn't cheer them 
up at all. 
They travelled across Ettinsmoor for many days, saving the bacon and living chiefly on the moor-fowl 

(they were not, of course, talking birds) which Eustace and the wiggle shot. Jill rather envied Eustace for 
being able to shoot; he had learned it on his voyage with King Caspian. As there were countless streams 
on the moor, they were never short of water. Jill thought that when, in books, people live on what they 
shoot, it never tells you what a long, smelly, messy job it is plucking and cleaning dead birds, and how 
cold it makes your fingers. But the great thing was that they met hardly any giants. One giant saw them, 
but he only roared with laughter and stumped away about his own business. 
About the tenth day, they reached a place where the country changed. They came to the northern edge of 
the moor and looked down a long, steep slope into a different, and grimmer, land. At the bottom of the 
slope were cliffs: beyond these, a country of high mountains, dark precipices, stony valleys, ravines so 
deep and narrow that one could not see far into them, and rivers that poured out of echoing gorges to 
plunge sullenly into black depths. Needless to say, it was Puddleglum who pointed out a sprinkling of 
snow on the more distant slopes. 
"But there'll be more on the north side of them, I shouldn't wonder," he added. 
It took them some time to reach the foot of the slope and, when they did, they looked down from the top 
of the cliffs at a river running below them from west to east. It was walled in by precipices on the far side 
as well as on their own, and it was green and sunless, full of rapids and waterfalls. The roar of it shook the 
earth even where they stood. 
"The bright side of it is," said Puddleglum, "that if we break our necks getting down the cliff, then we're 
safe from being drowned in the river." 
"What about that?" said Scrubb suddenly, pointing upstream to their left. 
Then they all looked and saw the last thing they were expecting - a bridge. 
And what a bridge, too! It was a huge, single arch that spanned the gorge from cliff-top to cliff-top; and 
the crown of that arch was as high above the cliff-tops as the dome of St Paul's is above the street. 
"Why, it must be a giants' bridge!" said Jill. 

"Or a sorcerer's, more likely," said Puddleglum. "We've got to look out for enchantments in a place like 
this. I think it's a trap. I think it'll turn into mist and melt away just when we're out on the middle of it." 
"Oh, for goodness' sake, don't be such a wet blanket," said Scrubb. "Why on earth shouldn't it be a proper 
bridge?" 
"Do you think any of the giants we've seen would have sense to build a thing like that?" said Puddleglum. 
"But mightn't it have been built by other giants?" said Jill. "I mean, by giants who lived hundreds of years 
ago, and were far cleverer than the modern kind. It might have been built by the same ones who built the 
giant city we're looking for. And that would mean we were on the right track - the old bridge leading to 
the old city!" 
"That's a real brain-wave, Pole," said Scrubb. "It must be that. Come on." 
So they turned and went to the bridge. And when they reached it, it certainly seemed solid enough. The 
single stones were as big as those at Stonehenge and must have been squared by good masons once, 
though now they were cracked and crumbled. The balustrade had apparently been covered with rich 
carvings, of which some traces remained; mouldering faces and forms of giants, minotaurs, squids, 
centipedes, and dreadful gods. Puddleglum still didn't trust it, but he consented to cross it with the 
children. 
The climb up to the crown of the arch was long and heavy. In many places the great stones had dropped 
out, leaving horrible gaps through which you looked down on the river foaming thousands of feet below. 
They saw an eagle fly through under their feet. And the higher they went, the colder it grew, and the wind 
blew so that they could hardly keep their footing. It seemed to shake the bridge. 
When they reached the top and could look down the farther slope of the bridge, they saw what looked 
like the remains of an ancient giant road stretching away before them into the heart of the mountains. 
Many stones of its pavement were missing and there were wide patches of grass between those that 
remained. And riding towards them on that ancient road were two people of normal grown-up human size. 
"Keep on. Move towards them," said Puddleglum. "Anyone you meet in a place like this is as likely as 

not to be an enemy, but we mustn't let them think we're afraid." 
By the time they had stepped off the end of the bridge on to the grass, the two strangers were quite close. 
One was a knight in complete armour with his visor down. His armour and his horse were black; there 
was no device on his shield and no banneret on his spear. The other was a lady on a white horse, a horse 
so lovely that you wanted to kiss its nose and give it a lump of sugar at once. But the lady, who rode sidesaddle 
and wore a long, fluttering dress of dazzling green, was lovelier still. 
"Good day, t-r-r-avellers," she cried out in a voice as sweet as the sweetest bird's song, trilling her R's 
delightfully. "Some of you are young pilgrims to walk this rough waste." 
"That's as may be, Ma'am," said Puddleglum very stiffly and on his guard. 
"We're looking for the ruined city of the giants," said Jill. 
"The r-r-ruined city?" said the Lady. "That is a strange place to be seeking. What will you do if you find 
it?" 
"We've got to -" began Jill, but Puddleglum interrupted. 
"Begging your pardon, Ma'am. But we don't know you or your friend - a silent chap, isn't he? - and you 
don't know us. And we'd as soon not talk to strangers about our business, if you don't mind. Shall we have 
a little rain soon, do you think?" 
The Lady laughed: the richest, most musical laugh you can imagine. "Well, children," she said, "you 
have a wise, solemn old guide with you. I think none the worse of him for keeping his own counsel, but 
I'll be free with mine. I have often heard the name of the giantish City Ruinous, but never met any who 
would tell me the way thither. This road leads to the burgh and castle of Harfang, where dwell the gentle 
giants. They are as mild, civil, prudent, and courteous as those of Ettinsmoor are foolish, fierce, savage, 
and given to all beastliness. And in Harfang you may or may not hear tidings of the City Ruinous, but 
certainly you shall find good lodgings and merry hosts. You would be wise to winter there, or, at the least, 
to tarry certain days for your ease and refreshment. There you shall have steaming baths, soft beds, and 
bright hearths; and the roast and the baked and the sweet and the strong will be on the table four times in a 
day." 

"I say!" exclaimed Scrubb. "That's something like! Think of sleeping in a bed again." 
"Yes, and having a hot bath," said Jill. "Do you think they'll ask us to stay? We don't know them, you 
see." 
"Only tell them," answered the Lady, "that She of the Green Kirtle salutes them by you, and has sent 
them two fair Southern children for the Autumn Feast." 
"Oh, thank you, thank you ever so much," said Jill and Scrubb. 
"But have a care," said the Lady. "On whatever day you reach Harfang, that you come not to the door too 
late. For they shut their gates a few hours after noon, and it is the custom of the castle that they open to 
none when once they have drawn bolt, how hard so ever he knock." 
The children thanked her again, with shining eyes, and the Lady waved to them. The Marsh-wiggle took 
off his steeple-hat and bowed very stiffly. 
Then the silent Knight and the Lady started walking their horses up the slope of the bridge with a great 
clatter of hoofs. 
"Well!" said Puddleglum. "I'd give a good deal to know where she's coming from and where she's going. 
Not the sort you expect to meet in the wilds of Giantland, is she? Up to no good, I'll be bound." 
"Oh rot!" said Scrubb. "I thought she was simply super. And think of hot meals and warm rooms. I do 
hope Harfang isn't a long way off." 
"Same here," said Jill. "And hadn't she a scrumptious dress. And the horse!" 

"All the same," said Puddleglum, "I wish we knew a bit more about her." 
"I was going to ask her all about herself," said Jill. "But how could I when you wouldn't tell her anything 
about us?" 
"Yes," said Scrubb. "And why were you so stiff and unpleasant. Didn't you like them?" 
"Them?" said the wiggle. "Who's them? I only saw one." 
"Didn't you see the Knight?" asked Jill. 
"I saw a suit of armour," said Puddleglum. "Why didn't he speak?" 
"I expect he was shy," said Jill. "Or perhaps he just wants to look at her and listen to her lovely voice. I'm 
sure I would if I was him." 
"I was wondering," remarked Puddleglum, "what you'd really see if you lifted up the visor of that helmet 
and looked inside." 
"Hang it all," said Scrubb. "Think of the shape of the armour! What could be inside it except a man?" 
"How about a skeleton?" asked the Marsh-wiggle with ghastly cheerfulness. 
"Or perhaps," he added as an afterthought, "nothing at all. I mean, nothing you could see. Someone 
invisible." 
"Really, Puddleglum," said Jill with a shudder, "you do have the most horrible ideas. How do you think 

of them all?" 
"Oh, bother his ideas!" said Scrubb. "He's always expecting the worst, and he's always wrong. Let's think 
about those Gentle Giants and get on to Harfang as quickly as we can. I wish I knew how far it is." 
And now they nearly had the first of those quarrels which Puddleglum had foretold: not that Jill and 
Scrubb hadn't been sparring and snapping at each other a good deal before, but this was the first really 
serious disagreement. Puddleglum didn't want them to go to Harfang at all. He said that he didn't know 
what a giant's idea of being "gentle" might be, and that, anyway, Aslan's signs had said nothing about 
staying with giants, gentle or otherwise. The children, on the other hand, who were sick of wind and rain, 
and skinny fowl roasted over campfires, and hard, cold earth to sleep on, were absolutely dead set to visit 
the Gentle Giants. In the end, Puddleglum agreed to do so, but only on one condition. The others must 
give an absolute promise that, unless he gave them leave, they would not tell the Gentle Giants that they 
came from Narnia or that they were looking for Prince Rilian. And they gave him this promise, and went 
on. 
After that talk with the Lady things got worse in two different ways. In the first place the country was 
much harder. The road led through endless, narrow valleys down which a cruel north wind was always 
blowing in their faces. There was nothing that could be used for firewood, and there were no nice little 
hollows to camp in, as there had been on the moor. And the ground was all stony, and made your feet sore 
by day and every bit of you sore by night. 
In the second place, whatever the Lady had intended by telling them about Harfang, the actual effect on 
the children was a bad one. They could think about nothing but beds and baths and hot meals and how 
lovely it would be to get indoors. They never talked about Aslan, or even about the lost prince, now. And 
Jill gave up her habit of repeating the signs over to herself every night and morning. She said to herself, at 
first, that she was too tired, but she soon forgot all about it. And though you might have expected that the 
idea of having a good time at Harfang would have made them more cheerful, it really made them more 
sorry for themselves and more grumpy and snappy with each other and with Puddleglum. 
At last they came one afternoon to a place where the gorge in which they were travelling widened out and 
dark fir woods rose on either side. They looked ahead and saw that they had come through the mountains. 
Before them lay a desolate, rocky plain: beyond it, further mountains capped with snow. 
But between them and those further mountains rose a low hill with an irregular flattish top. 

"Look! Look!" cried Jill, and pointed across the plain; and there, through the gathering dusk, from 
beyond the flat hill, everyone saw lights. Lights! Not moonlight, nor fires, but a homely cheering row of 
lighted windows. If you have never been in the wild wilderness, day and night, for weeks, you will hardly 
understand how they felt. 
"Harfang!" cried Scrubb and Jill in glad, excited voices; and "Harfang," repeated Puddleglum in a dull, 
gloomy voice. But he added, "Hullo! Wild geese!" and had the bow off his shoulder in a second. He 
brought down a good fat goose. It was far too late to think of reaching Harfang that day. 
But they had a hot meal and a fire, and started the night warmer than they had been for over a week. 
After the fire had gone out, the night grew bitterly cold, and when they woke next morning, their blankets 
were stiff with frost. 
"Never mind!" said Jill, stamping her feet. "Hot baths tonight!" 
THERE Is no denying it was a beast of a day. Overhead was a sunless sky, muffled in clouds that were 
heavy with snow; underfoot, a black frost; blowing over it, a wind that felt as if it would take your skin 
off. When they got down into the plain they found that this part of the ancient road was much more 
ruinous than any they had yet seen. They had to pick their way over great broken stones and between 
boulders and across rubble: hard going for sore feet. And, however tired they got, it was far too cold for a 
halt. 
At about ten o'clock the first tiny snow flakes came loitering down and settled on Jill's arm. Ten minutes 
later they were falling quite thickly. 
In twenty minutes the ground was noticeably white. And by the end of half an hour a good steady 
snowstorm, which looked as if it meant to last all day, was driving in their faces so that they could hardly 
see. 
In order to understand what followed, you must keep on remembering how little they could see. As they 
drew near the low hill which separated them from the place where the lighted windows had appeared, they 

had no general view of it at all. It was a question of seeing the next few paces ahead, and, even for that, 
you had to screw up your eyes. Needless to say, they were not talking. 
When they reached the foot of the hill they caught a glimpse of what might be rocks on each side - 
squarish rocks, if you looked at them carefully, but no one did. All were more concerned with the ledge 
right in front of them which barred their way. It was about four feet high. The Marsh-wiggle, with his 
long legs, had no difficulty in jumping onto the top of it, and he then helped the others up. It was a nasty 
wet business for them, though not for him, because the snow now lay quite deep on the ledge. They then 
had a stiff climb - Jill fell once - up very rough ground for about a hundred yards, and came to a second 
ledge. There were four of these ledges altogether, at quite irregular intervals. 
As they struggled on to the fourth ledge, there was no mistaking the fact that they were now at the top of 
the flat hill. Up till now the slope had given them some shelter; here, they got the full fury of the wind. 
For the hill, oddly enough, was quite as flat on top as it had looked from a distance: a great level tableland 
which the storm tore across without resistance. In most places the snow was still hardly lying at all, for 
the wind kept catching it up off the ground in sheets and clouds, and hurling it in their faces. And round 
their feet little eddies of snow ran about as you sometimes see them doing over ice. And, indeed, in many 
places, the surface was almost as smooth as ice. But to make matters worse it was crossed and 
crisscrossed with curious banks or dykes, which sometimes divided it up into squares and oblongs. All 
these of course had to be climbed; they varied from two to five feet in height and were about a couple of 
yards thick. On the north side of each bank the snow already lay in deep drifts; and after each climb you 
came down into a drift and got wet. 
Fighting her way forward with hood up and head down and numb hands inside her cloak, Jill had 
glimpses of other odd things on that horrible tableland - things on her right that looked vaguely like 
factory chimneys, and, on her left, a huge cliff, straighter than any cliff ought to be. But she wasn't at all 
interested and didn't give them a thought. The only things she thought about were her cold hands (and 
nose and chin and ears) and hot baths and beds at Harfang. 
Suddenly she skidded, slid about five feet, and found herself to her horror sliding down into a dark, 
narrow chasm which seemed that moment to have appeared in front of her. Half a second later she had 
reached the bottom. 
She appeared to be in a kind of trench or groove, only about three feet wide. And though she was shaken 
by the fall, almost the first thing she noticed was the relief of being out of the wind; for the walls of the 
trench rose high above her. The next thing she noticed was, naturally, the anxious faces of Scrubb and 
Puddleglum looking down at her from the edge. 

"Are you hurt, Pole?" shouted Scrubb. 
"Both legs broken, I shouldn't wonder," shouted Puddleglum. 
Jill stood up and explained that she was all right, but they'd have to help her out. 
"What is it you've fallen into?" asked Scrubb. 
"It's a kind of trench, or it might be a kind of sunken lane or something," said Jill. "It runs quite straight." 
"Yes, by Jove," said Scrubb. "And it runs due north! I wonder is it a sort of road? If it was, we'd be out of 
this infernal wind down there. Is there a lot of snow at the bottom?" 
"Hardly any. It all blows over the top, I suppose." 
"What happens farther on?" 
"Half a sec. I'll go and see," said Jill. She got up and walked along the trench; but before she had gone 
far, it turned sharply to the right. She shouted this information back to the others. 
"What's round the corner?" asked Scrubb. 
Now it happened that Jill had the same feeling about twisty passages and dark places underground, or 
even nearly underground, that Scrubb had about the edges of cliffs. She had no intention of going round 
that corner alone; especially when she heard Puddleglum bawling out from behind her: 
"Be careful, Pole. It's just the sort of place that might lead to a dragon's cave. And in a giant country, 
there might be giant earth-worms or giant beetles." 

"I don't think it goes anywhere much," said Jill, coming hastily back. 
"I'm jolly well going to have a look," said Scrubb. "What do you mean by anywhere much, I should like 
to know?" So he sat down on the edge of the trench (everyone was too wet by now to bother about being a 
bit wetter) and then dropped in. He pushed past Jill and, though he didn't say anything, she felt sure that 
he knew she had funked it. So she followed him close, but took care not to get in front of him. 
It proved, however, a disappointing exploration. They went round the right-hand turn and straight on for 
a few paces. Here there was a choice of ways: straight on again, or sharp to the right. "That's no good," 
said Scrubb, glancing down the right-hand turn, "that would be taking us back - south." He went straight 
on, but once more, in a few steps, they found a second turn to the right. But this time there was no choice 
of ways, for the trench they had been following here came to a dead end. 
"No good," grunted Scrubb. Jill lost no time in turning and leading the way back. When they returned to 
the place where Jill had first fallen in, the Marsh-wiggle with his long arms had no difficulty in pulling 
them out. 
But it was dreadful to be out on top again. Down in those narrow slits of trenches, their ears had almost 
begun to thaw. They had been able to see clearly and breathe easily and hear each other speak without 
shouting. It was absolute misery to come back into the withering coldness. And it did seem hard when 
Puddleglum chose that moment for saying: 
"Are you still sure of those signs, Pole? What's the one we ought to be after, now?" 
"Oh, come on! Bother the signs," said Pole. "Something about someone mentioning Aslan's name, I 
think. But I'm jolly well not going to give a recitation here." 
As you see, she had got the order wrong. That was because she had given up saying the signs over every 
night. She still really knew them, if she troubled to think: but she was no longer so "pat" in her lesson as 
to be sure of reeling them off in the right order at a moment's notice and without thinking. Puddleglum's 
question annoyed her because, deep down inside her, she was already annoyed with herself for not 
knowing the Lion's lesson quite so well as she felt she ought to have known it. This annoyance, added to 
the misery of being very cold and tired, made her say, "Bother the signs." She didn't perhaps quite mean 

it. 
"Oh, that was next, was it?" said Puddleglum. "Now I wonder, are you right? Got 'em mixed, I shouldn't 
wonder. It seems to me, this hill, this flat place we're on, is worth stopping to have a look at. Have you 
noticed -" 
"Oh Lor!" said Scrubb, "is this a time for stopping to admire the view? For goodness' sake let's get on." 
"Oh, look, look, look," cried Jill and pointed. Everyone turned, and everyone saw. Some way off to the 
north, and a good deal higher up than the tableland on which they stood, a line of lights had appeared. 
This time, even more obviously than when the travellers had seen them the night before, they were 
windows: smaller windows that made one think deliciously of bedrooms, and larger windows that made 
one think of great halls with fires roaring on the hearth and hot soup or juicy sirloins smoking on the 
table. 
"Harfang!" exclaimed Scrubb. 
"That's all very well," said Puddleglum. "But what I was saying was -" 
"Oh, shut up," said Jill crossly. "We haven't a moment to lose. Don't you remember what the Lady said 
about their locking up so early? We must get there in time, we must, we must. We'll die if we're shut out 
on a night like this." 
"Well, it isn't exactly a night, not yet," began Puddleglum; but the two children both said, "Come on," 
and began stumbling forward on the slippery tableland as quickly as their legs would carry them. The 
Marsh-wiggle followed them: still talking, but now that they were forcing their way into the wind again, 
they could not have heard him even if they had wanted to. 
And they didn't want. They were thinking of baths and beds and hot drinks; and the idea of coming to 
Harfang too late and being shut out was almost unbearable. 
In spite of their haste, it took them a long time to cross the flat top of that hill. And even when they had 

crossed it, there were still several ledges to climb down on the far side. But at last they reached the bottom 
and could see what Harfang was like. 
It stood on a high crag, and in spite of its many towers was more a huge house than a castle. Obviously, 
the Gentle Giants feared no attack. There were windows in the outside wall quite close to the ground - a 
thing no one would have in a serious fortress. There were even odd little doors here and there, so that it 
would be quite easy to get in and out of the castle without going through the courtyard. This raised the 
spirits of Jill and Scrubb. It made the whole place look more friendly and less forbidding. 
At first the height and steepness of the crag frightened them, but presently they noticed that there was an 
easier way up on the left and that the road wound up towards it. It was a terrible climb, after the journey 
they had already had, and Jill nearly gave up. Scrubb and Puddleglum had to help her for the last hundred 
yards. 
But in the end they stood before the castle gate. The portcullis was up and the gate open. 
However tired you are, it takes some nerve to walk up to a giant's front door. In spite of all his previous 
warnings against Harfang, it was Puddleglum who showed most courage. 
"Steady pace, now," he said. "Don't look frightened, whatever you do. We've done the silliest thing in the 
world by coming at all: but now that we are here, we'd best put a bold face on it." 
With these words he strode forward into the gateway, stood still under the arch where the echo would 
help his voice, and called out as loud as he could. 
"Ho! Porter! Guests who seek lodging." 
And while he was waiting for something to happen, he took off his hat and knocked off the heavy mass 
of snow which had gathered on its wide brim. 
"I say," whispered Scrubb to Jill. "He may be a wet blanket, but he has plenty of pluck - and cheek." 

A door opened, letting out a delicious glow of firelight, and the Porter appeared. Jill bit her lips for fear 
she should scream. He was not a perfectly enormous giant; that is to say, he was rather taller than an apple 
tree but nothing like so tall as a telegraph pole. He had bristly red hair, a leather jerkin with metal plates 
fastened all over it so as to make a kind of mail shirt, bare knees (very hairy indeed) and things like 
puttees on his legs. He stooped down and goggled at Puddleglum. 
"And what sort of creature do you call yourself," he said. 
Jill took her courage in both hands. "Please," she said, shouting up at the giant. "The Lady of the Green 
Kirtle salutes the King of the Gentle Giants, and has sent us two Southern children and this Marsh-wiggle 
(his name's Puddleglum) to your Autumn Feast. - If it's quite convenient, of course," she added. 
"Oho!" said the Porter. "That's quite a different story. Come in, little people, come in. You'd best come 
into the lodge while I'm sending word to his Majesty." He looked at the children with curiosity. "Blue 
faces," he said. "I didn't know they. were that colour. Don't care about it myself. 
But I dare say you look quite nice to one another. Beetles fancy other beetles, they do say." 
"Our faces are only blue with cold," said Jill. "We're not this colour really." 
"Then come in and get warm. Come in, little shrimps," said the Porter. They followed him into the lodge. 
And though it was rather terrible to hear such a big door clang shut behind them, they forgot about it as 
soon as they saw the thing they had been longing for ever since supper time last night - afire. And such a 
fire! It looked as if four or five whole trees were blazing on it, and it was so hot they couldn't go within 
yards of it. But they all flopped down on the brick floor, as near as they could bear the heat, and heaved 
great sighs of relief. 
"Now, youngster," said the Porter to another giant who had been sitting in the back of the room, staring at 
the visitors till it looked as if his eyes would start out of his head, "run across with this message to the 
House." And he repeated what Jill had said to him. The younger giant, after a final stare, and a great 
guffaw, left the room. 

"Now, Froggy," said the Porter to Puddleglum, "you look as if you wanted some cheering up." He 
produced a black bottle very like Puddleglum's own, but about twenty times larger. "Let me see, let me 
see," said the Porter. 
"I can't give you a cup or you'll drown yourself. Let me see. This salt-cellar will be just the thing. You 
needn't mention it over at the House. The silver will keep on getting over here, and it's not my fault." 
The salt-cellar was not very like one of ours, being narrower and more upright, and made quite a good 
cup for Puddleglum, when the giant set it down on the floor beside him. The children expected 
Puddleglum to refuse it, distrusting the Gentle Giants as he did. But he muttered, "It's rather late to be 
thinking of precautions now that we're inside and the door shut behind us." Then he sniffed at the liquor. 
"Smells all right," he said. 
"But that's nothing to go by. Better make sure," and took a sip. "Tastes all right, too," he said. "But it 
might do that at the first sip. How does it go on?" He took a larger sip. "Ah!" he said. "But is it the same 
all the way down?" and took another. "There'll be something nasty at the bottom, I shouldn't wonder," he 
said, and finished the drink. He licked his lips and remarked to the children, "This'll be a test, you see. If I 
curl up, or burst, or turn into a lizard, or something, then you'll know not to take anything they offer you." 
But the giant, who was too far up to hear the things Puddleglum had been saying under his breath, roared 
with laughter and said, "Why, Froggy, you're a man. See him put it away!" 
"Not a man . . . Marsh-wiggle," replied Puddleglum in a somewhat indistinct voice. "Not frog either: 
Marshwiggle." 
At that moment the door opened behind them and the younger giant came in saying, "They're to go to the 
throne-room at once." 
The children stood up but Puddleglum remained sitting and said, "Marsh-wiggle. Marsh-wiggle. Very 
respectable Marsh-wiggle. 
Respectowiggle." 
"Show them the way, young 'un," said the giant Porter. "You'd better carry Froggy. He's had a drop more 
than's good for him." 

"Nothing wrong with me," said Puddleglum. "Not a frog. Nothing frog with me. I'm a respectabiggle." 
But the young giant caught him up by the waist and signed to the children to follow. In this undignified 
way they crossed the courtyard. Puddleglum, held in the giant's fist, and vaguely kicking the air, did 
certainly look very like a frog. But they had little time to notice this, for they soon entered the great 
doorway of the main castle - both their hearts beating faster than usual - and, after pattering along several 
corridors at a trot to keep up with the giant's paces, found themselves blinking in the light of an enormous 
room, where lamps glowed and a fire roared on the hearth and both were reflected from the gilding of roof 
and cornice. More giants than they could count stood on their left and right, all in magnificent robes; and 
on two thrones at the far end, sat two huge shapes that appeared to be the King and Queen. 
About twenty feet from the thrones, they stopped. Scrubb and Jill made an awkward attempt at a bow 
(girls are not taught how to curtsey at Experiment House) and the young giant carefully put Puddleglum 
down on the floor, where he collapsed into a sort of sitting position. With his long limbs he looked, to tell 
the truth, uncommonly like a large spider. 
"Go on, Pole, do your stuff," whispered Scrubb. 
Jill found that her mouth was so dry that she couldn't speak a word. She nodded savagely at Scrubb. 
Thinking to himself that he would never forgive her (or Puddleglum either), Scrubb licked his lips and 
shouted up to the King giant. 
"If you please, Sire, the Lady of the Green Kirtle salutes you by us and said you'd like to have us for your 
Autumn Feast." 
The giant King and Queen looked at each other, nodded to each other, and smiled in a way that Jill didn't 
exactly like. She liked the King better than the Queen. He had a fine, curled beard and a straight eagle-like 

nose, and was really rather good-looking as giants go. The Queen was dreadfully fat and had a double 
chin and a fat, powdered face - which isn't a very nice thing at the best of times, and of course looks much 
worse when it is ten times too big. Then the King put out his tongue and licked his lips. 
Anyone might do that: but his tongue was so very large and red, and came out so unexpectedly, that it 
gave Jill quite a shock. 
"Oh, what good children!" said the Queen. ("Perhaps she's the nice one after all," thought Jill.) 
"Yes indeed," said the King. "Quite excellent children. We welcome you to our court. Give me your 
hands." 
He stretched down his great right hand - very clean and with any number of rings on the fingers, but also 
with terrible pointed nails. He was much too big to shake the hands which the children, in turn, held up to 
him; but he shook the arms. 
"And what's that?" asked the King, pointing to Puddleglum. 
"Reshpeckobiggle," said Puddleglum. 
"Oh!" screamed the Queen, gathering her skirts close about her ankles. "The horrid thing! It's alive." 
"He's quite all right, your Majesty, really, he is," said Scrubb hastily. 
"You'll like him much better when you get to know him. I'm sure you will." 
I hope you won't lose all interest in Jill for the rest of the book if I tell you that at this moment she began 
to cry. There was a good deal of excuse for her. Her feet and hands and ears and nose were still only just 
beginning to thaw; melted snow was trickling off her clothes; she had had hardly anything to eat or drink 
that day; and her legs were aching so that she felt she could not go on standing much longer. Anyway, it 

did more good at the moment than anything else would have done, for the Queen said: 
"Ah, the poor child! My lord, we do wrong to keep our guests standing. 
Quick, some of you! Take them away. Give them food and wine and baths. 
Comfort the little girl. Give her lollipops, give her dolls, give her physics, give her all you can think of - 
possets and comfits and caraways and lullabies and toys. Don't cry, little girl, or you won't be good for 
anything when the feast comes." 
Jill was just as indignant as you and I would have been at the mention of toys and dolls; and, though 
lollipops and comfits might be all very well in their way, she very much hoped that something more solid 
would be provided. 
The Queen's foolish speech, however, produced excellent results, for Puddleglum and Scrubb were at 
once picked up by gigantic gentlemen-in-waiting, and Jill by a gigantic maid of honour, and carried off to 
their rooms. 
Jill's room was about the size of a church, and would have been rather grim if it had not had a roaring fire 
on the hearth and a very thick crimson carpet on the floor. And here delightful things began to happen to 
her. She was handed over to the Queen's old Nurse, who was, from the giants' point of view, a little old 
woman almost bent double with age, and, from the human point of view, a giantess small enough to go 
about an ordinary room without knocking her head on the ceiling. She was very capable, though Jill did 
wish she wouldn't keep on clicking her tongue and saying things like "Oh la, la! Ups-adaisy" and "There's 
a duck" and "Now we'll be all right, my poppet". She filled a giant foot-bath with hot water and helped Jill 
into it. If you can swim (as Jill could) a giant bath is a lovely thing. 
And giant towels, though a bit rough and coarse, are lovely too, because there are acres of them. In fact 
you don't need to dry at all, you just roll about on them in front of the fire and enjoy yourself. And when 
that was over, clean, fresh, warmed clothes were put on Jill: very splendid clothes and a little too big for 
her, but clearly made for humans not giantesses. "I suppose if that woman in the green kirtle comes here, 
they must be used to guests of our size," thought Jill. 
She soon saw that she was right about this, for a table and chair of the right height for an ordinary grown

up human were placed for her, and the knives and forks and spoons were the proper size too. It was 
delightful to sit down, feeling warm and clean at last. Her feet were still bare and it was lovely to tread on 
the giant carpet. She sank in it well over her ankles and it was just the thing for sore feet. The meal - 
which I suppose we must call dinner, though it was nearer tea time - was cock-a-leekie soup, and hot roast 
turkey, and a steamed pudding, and roast chestnuts, and as much fruit as you could eat. 
The only annoying thing was that the Nurse kept coming in and out, and every time she came in, she 
brought a gigantic toy with her - a huge doll, bigger than Jill herself, a wooden horse on wheels, about the 
size of an elephant, a drum that looked like a young gasometer, and a woolly lamb. 
They were crude, badly made things, painted in very bright colours, and Jill hated the sight of them. She 
kept on telling the Nurse she didn't want them, but the Nurse said: 
"Tut-tut-tut-tut. You'll want 'em all right when you've had a bit of a rest, I know! Te-he-he! Beddy bye, 
now. A precious poppet!" 
The bed was not a giant bed but only a big four-poster, like what you might see in an old-fashioned hotel; 
and very small it looked in that enormous room. She was very glad to tumble into it. 
"Is it still snowing, Nurse?" she asked sleepily. 
"No. Raining now, ducky!" said the giantess. "Rain'll wash away all the nasty snow. Precious poppet will 
be able to go out and play tomorrow!" And she tucked Jill up and said good night. 
I know nothing so disagreeable as being kissed by a giantess. Jill thought the same, but was asleep in five 
minutes. 
The rain fell steadily all the evening and all the night, dashing against the windows of the castle, and Jill 
never heard it but slept deeply, past supper time and past midnight. And then came the deadest hour of the 
night and nothing stirred but mice in the house of the giants. At that hour there came to Jill a dream. It 
seemed to her that she awoke in the same room and saw the fire, sunk low and red, and in the firelight the 
great wooden horse. And the horse came of its own will, rolling on its wheels across the carpet, and stood 
at her head. And now it was no longer a horse, but a lion as big as the horse. And then it was not a toy 
lion, but a real lion, The Real Lion, just as she had seen him on the mountain beyond the world's end. 

And a smell of all sweet-smelling things there are filled the room. But there was some trouble in Jill's 
mind, though she could not think what it was, and the tears streamed down her face and wet the pillow. 
The Lion told her to repeat the signs, and she found that she had forgotten them all. At that, a great horror 
came over her. And Aslan took her up in his jaws (she could feel his lips and his breath but not his teeth) 
and carried her to the window and made her look out. The moon shone bright; and written in great letters 
across the world or the sky (she did not know which) were the words UNDER ME. After that, the dream 
faded away, and when she woke, very late next morning, she did not remember that she had dreamed at 
all. 
She was up and dressed and had finished breakfast in front of the fire when the Nurse opened the door 
and said: "Here's pretty poppet's little friends come to play with her." 
In came Scrubb and the Marsh-wiggle. 
"Hullo! Good morning," said Jill. "Isn't this fun? I've slept about fifteen hours, I believe. I do feel better, 
don't you?" 
"1 do," said Scrubb, "but Puddleglum says he has a headache. Hullo! - your window has a window seat. 
If we got up on that, we could see out." And at once they all did so: and at the first glance Jill said, "Oh, 
how perfectly dreadful!" 
The sun was shining and, except for a few drifts, the snow had been almost completely washed away by 
the rain. Down below them, spread out like a map, lay the flat hill-top which they had struggled over 
yesterday afternoon; seen from the castle, it could not be mistaken for anything but the ruins of a gigantic 
city. It had been flat, as Jill now saw, because it was still, on the whole, paved, though in places the 
pavement was broken. The criss-cross banks were what was left of the walls of huge buildings which 
might once have been giants' palaces and temples. One bit of wall, about five hundred feet high, was still 
standing; it was that which she had thought was a cliff. The things that had looked like factory chimneys 
were enormous pillars, broken off at unequal heights; their fragments lay at their bases like felled trees of 
monstrous stone. The ledges which they had climbed down on the north side of the hill - and also, no 
doubt the other ledges which they had climbed up on the south side - were the remaining steps of giant 
stairs. To crown all, in large, dark lettering across the centre of the pavement, ran the words UNDER ME. 
The three travellers looked at each other in dismay, and, after a short whistle, Scrubb said what they were 
all thinking, "The second and third signs muffed." And at that moment Jill's dream rushed back into her 

mind. 
"It's my fault," she said in despairing tones. "I - I'd given up repeating the signs every night. If I'd been 
thinking about them I could have seen it was the city, even in all that snow." 
"I'm worse," said Puddleglum. "I did see, or nearly. I thought it looked uncommonly like a ruined city." 
"You're the only one who isn't to blame," said Scrubb. "You did try to make us stop." 
"Didn't try hard enough, though," said the Marshwiggle. "And I'd no call to be trying. I ought to have 
done it. As if I couldn't have stopped you two with one hand each!" 
"The truth is," said Scrubb, "we were so jolly keen on getting to this place that we weren't bothering 
about anything else. At least I know I was. 
Ever since we met that woman with the knight who didn't talk, we've been thinking of nothing else. We'd 
nearly forgotten about Prince Rilian." 
"I shouldn't wonder," said Puddleglum, "if that wasn't exactly what she intended." 
"What I don't quite understand," said Jill, "is how we didn't see the lettering? Or could it have come there 
since last night. Could he - Aslan - have put it there in the night? I had such a queer dream." And she told 
them all about it. 
"Why, you chump!" said Scrubb. "We did see it. We got into the lettering. 
Don't you see? We got into the letter E in ME. That was your sunk lane. We walked along the bottom 
stroke of the E, due north - turned to our right along the upright - came to another turn to the right - that's 
the middle stroke - and then went on to the top left-hand corner, or (if you like) the north-eastern corner of 
the letter, and came back. Like the bally idiots we are." He kicked the window seat savagely, and went on, 

"So it's no good, Pole. I know what you were thinking because I was thinking the same. You were 
thinking how nice it would have been if Aslan hadn't put the instructions on the stones of the ruined city 
till after we'd passed it. 
And then it would have been his fault, not ours. So likely, isn't it? No. 
We must just own up. We've only four signs to go by, and we've muffed the first three." 
"You mean I have," said Jill. "It's quite true. I've spoiled everything ever since you brought me here. All 
the same - I'm frightfully sorry and all that - all the same, what are the instructions? UNDER ME doesn't 
seem to make much sense." 
"Yes it does, though," said Puddleglum. "It means we've got to look for the Prince under that city." 
"But how can we?" asked Jill. 
"That's the question," said Puddleglum, rubbing his big, frog-like hands together. "How can we now? No 
doubt, if we'd had our minds on our job when we were at the Ruinous City, we'd have been shown how - 
found a little door, or a cave, or a tunnel, met someone to help us. Might have been (you never know) 
Aslan himself. We'd have got down under those paving-stones somehow or other. Aslan's instructions 
always work: there are no exceptions. But how to do it now - that's another matter." 
"Well, we shall just have to go back, I suppose," said Jill. 
"Easy, isn't it?" said Puddleglum. "We might try opening that door to begin with." And they all looked at 
the door and saw that none of them could reach the handle, and that almost certainly no one could turn it 
if they did. 
"Do you think they won't let us out if we ask?" said Jill. And nobody said, but everyone thought, 
"Supposing they don't." 

It was not a pleasant idea. Puddleglum was dead against any idea of telling the giants their real business 
and simply asking to be let out; and of course the children couldn't tell without his permission, because 
they had promised. And all three felt pretty sure that there would be no chance of escaping from the castle 
by night. Once they were in their rooms with the doors shut, they would be prisoners till morning. They 
might, of course, ask to have their doors left open, but that would rouse suspicions. 
"Our only chance," said Scrubb, "is to try to sneak away by daylight. 
Mightn't there be an hour in the afternoon when most of the giants are asleep? - and if we could steal 
down into the kitchen, mightn't there be a back door open?" 
"It's hardly what I call a Chance," said the Marshwiggle. "But it's all the chance we're likely to get." As a 
matter of fact, Scrubb's plan was not quite so hopeless as you might think. If you want to get out of a 
house without being seen, the middle of the afternoon is in some ways a better time to try it than the 
middle of the night. Doors and windows are more likely to be open; and if you are caught, you can always 
pretend you weren't meaning to go far and had no particular plans. (It is very hard to make either giants or 
grown-ups believe this if you're found climbing out of a bedroom window at one o'clock in the morning.) 
"We must put them off their guard, though," said Scrubb. "We must pretend we love being here and are 
longing for this Autumn Feast." 
"That's tomorrow night," said Puddleglum. "I heard one of them say so." 
"I see," said Jill. "We must pretend to be awfully excited about it, and keep on asking questions. They 
think we're absolute infants anyway, which will make it easier." 
"Gay," said Puddleglum with a deep sigh. "That's what we've got to be. Gay. 
As if we hadn't a care in the world. Frolicsome. You two youngsters haven't always got very high spirits, 
I've noticed. You must watch me, and do as I do. I'll be gay. Like this" - and he assumed a ghastly grin. 
"And frolicsome" - here he cut a most mournful caper. "You'll soon get into it, if you keep your eyes on 
me. They think I'm a funny fellow already, you see. I dare say you two thought I was a trifle tipsy last 
night, but I do assure you it was - well, most of it was - put on. I had an idea it would come in useful, 

somehow." 
The children, when they talked over their adventures afterwards, could never feel sure whether this last 
statement was quite strictly true; but they were sure that Puddleglum thought it was true when he made it. 
"All right. Gay's the word," said Scrubb. "Now, if we could only get someone to open this door. While 
we're fooling about and being gay, we've got to find out all we can about this castle." 
Luckily, at that very moment the door opened, and the giant Nurse bustled in saying, "Now, my poppets. 
Like to come and see the King and all the court setting out on the hunting? Such a pretty sight!" 
They lost no time in rushing out past her and climbing down the first staircase they came to. The noise of 
hounds and horns and giant voices guided them, so that in a few minutes they reached the courtyard. The 
giants were all on foot, for there are no giant horses in that part of the world, and the giants' hunting is 
done on foot; like beagling in England. 
The hounds were also of normal size. When Jill saw that there were no horses she was at first dreadfully 
disappointed, for she felt sure that the great fat Queen would never go after hounds on foot; and it would 
never do to have her about the house all day. But then she saw the Queen in a kind of litter supported on 
the shoulders of six young giants. The silly old creature was all got up in green and had a horn at her side. 
Twenty or thirty giants, including the King, were assembled, ready for the sport, all talking and laughing 
fit to deafen you: and down below, nearer Jill's level, there were wagging tails, and barking, and loose, 
slobbery mouths and noses of dogs thrust into your hand. Puddleglum was just beginning to strike what 
he thought a gay and gamesome attitude (which might have spoiled everything if it had been noticed) 
when Jill put on her most attractively childish smile, rushed across to the Queen's litter and shouted up to 
the Queen. 
"Oh, please! You're not going away, are you? You will come back?" 
"Yes, my dear," said the Queen. "I'll be back tonight." 

"Oh, good. How lovely!" said Jill. "And we may come to the feast tomorrow night, mayn't we? We're so 
longing for tomorrow night! And we do love being here. And while you're out, we may run over the 
whole castle and see everything, mayn't we? Do say yes." 
The Queen did say yes, but the laughter of all the courtiers nearly drowned her voice. 
THE others admitted afterwards that Jill had been wonderful that day. As soon as the King and the rest of 
the hunting party had set off, she began making a tour of the whole castle and asking questions, but all in 
such an innocent, babyish way that no one could suspect her of any secret design. 
Though her tongue was never still, you could hardly say she talked: she prattled and giggled. She made 
love to everyone - the grooms, the porters, the housemaids, the ladies-in-waiting, and the elderly giant 
lords whose hunting days were past. She submitted to being kissed and pawed about by any number of 
giantesses, many of whom seemed sorry for her and called her "a poor little thing" though none of them 
explained why. She made especial friends with the cook and discovered the all-important fact there was a 
scullery door which let you out through the outer wall, so that you did not have to cross the courtyard or 
pass the great gatehouse. In the kitchen she pretended to be greedy, and ate all sorts of scraps which the 
cook and scullions delighted to give her. But upstairs among the ladies she asked questions about how she 
would be dressed for the great feast, and how long she would be allowed to sit up, and whether she would 
dance with some very, very small giant. And then (it made her hot all over when she remembered it 
afterwards) she would put her head on one side in an idiotic fashion which grown-ups, giant and 
otherwise, thought very fetching, and shake her curls, and fidget, and say, "Oh, I do wish it was tomorrow 
night, don't you? Do you think the time will go quickly till then?" And all the giantesses said she was a 
perfect little darling; and some of them dabbed their eyes with enormous handkerchiefs as if they were 
going to cry. 
"They're dear little things at that age," said one giantess to another. "It seems almost a pity . . ." 
Scrubb and Puddleglum both did their best, but girls do that kind of thing better than boys. Even boys do 
it better than Marsh-wiggles. 
At lunchtime something happened which made all three of them more anxious than ever to leave the 
castle of the Gentle Giants. They had lunch in the great hall at a little table of their own, near the fireplace. 

At a bigger table, about twenty yards away, half a dozen old giants were lunching. 
Their conversation was so noisy, and so high up in the air, that the children soon took no more notice of 
it than you would of hooters outside the window or traffic noises in the street. They were eating cold 
venison, a kind of food which Jill had never tasted before, and she was liking it. 
Suddenly Puddleglum turned to them, and his face had gone so pale that you could see the paleness under 
the natural muddiness of his complexion. He said: 
"Don't eat another bite." 
"What's wrong?" asked the other two in a whisper. 
"Didn't you hear what those giants were saying? `That's a nice tender haunch of venison,' said one of 
them. `Then that stag was a liar,' said another. `Why?' said the first one. `Oh,' said the other. `They say 
that when he was caught he said, Don't kill me, I'm tough. You won't like me.'" For a moment Jill did not 
realize the full meaning of this. But she did when Scrubb's eyes opened wide with horror and he said: 
"So we've been eating a Talking stag." 
This discovery didn't have exactly the same effect on all of them. Jill, who was new to that world, was 
sorry for the poor stag and thought it rotten of the giants to have killed him. Scrubb, who had been in that 
world before and had at least one Talking beast as his dear friend, felt horrified; as you might feel about a 
murder. But Puddleglum, who was Narnian born, was sick and faint, and felt as you would feel if you 
found you had eaten a baby. 
"We've brought the anger of Aslan on us," he said. "That's what comes of not attending to the signs. 
We're under a curse, I expect. If it was allowed, it would be the best thing we could do, to take these 
knives and drive them into our own hearts." 
And gradually even Jill came to see it from his point of view. At any rate, none of them wanted any more 
lunch. And as soon as they thought it safe they crept quietly out of the hall. 

It was now drawing near to that time of the day on which their hopes of escape depended, and all became 
nervous. They hung about in passages and waited for things to become quiet. The giants in the hall sat on 
a dreadfully long time after the meal was over. The bald one was telling a story. When that was over, the 
three travellers dawdled down to the kitchen. But there were still plenty of giants there, or at least in the 
scullery, washing up and putting things away. It was agonizing, waiting till these finished their jobs and, 
one by one, wiped their hands and went away. At last only one old giantess was left in the room. She 
pottered about, and pottered about, and at last the three travellers realized with horror that she did not 
intend to go away at all. 
"Well, dearies," she said to them. "That job's about through. Let's put the kettle there. That'll make a nice 
cup of tea presently. Now I can have a little bit of a rest. Just look into the scullery, like good poppets, and 
tell me if the back door is open." 
"Yes, it is," said Scrubb. 
"That's right. I always leave it open so as Puss can get in and out, the poor thing." 
Then she sat down on one chair and put her feet up on another. 
"I don't know as I mightn't have forty winks," said the giantess. "If only that blarney hunting party doesn't 
come back too soon." 
All their spirits leaped up when she mentioned forty winks, and flopped down again when she mentioned 
the return of the hunting party. 
"When do they usually comeback?" asked Jill. 
"You never can tell," said the giantess. "But there; go and be quiet for a bit, my dearies." 

They retreated to the far end of the kitchen, and would have slipped out into the scullery there and then if 
the giantess had not sat up, opened her eyes, and brushed away a fly. "Don't try it till we're sure she's 
really asleep," whispered Scrubb. "Or it'll spoil everything." So they all huddled at the kitchen end, 
waiting and watching. The thought that the hunters might come back at any moment was terrible. And the 
giantess was fidgety. 
Whenever they thought she had really gone to sleep, she moved. 
"I can't bear this," thought Jill. To distract her mind, she began looking about her. Just in front of her was 
a clean wide table with two clean pie-dishes on it, and an open book. They were giant pie-dishes of 
course. 
Jill thought that she could lie down just comfortably in one of them. Then she climbed up on the bench 
beside the table to look at the book. She read: 
MALLARD. This delicious bird can be cooked in a variety of ways. 
"It's a cookery book," thought Jill without much interest, and glanced over her shoulder. The giantess's 
eyes were shut but she didn't look as if she were properly asleep. Jill glanced back at the book. It was 
arranged alphabetically: and at the very next entry her heart seemed to stop beating; It ran 
MAN. This elegant little biped has long been valued as a delicacy. It forms a traditional part of the 
Autumn Feast, and is served between the fish and the joint. Each Man... 
but she could not bear to read any more. She turned round. The giantess had wakened up and was having 
a fit of coughing. Jill nudged the other two and pointed to the book. They also mounted the bench and 
bent over the huge pages. Scrubb was still reading about how to cook Men when Puddleglum pointed to 
the next entry below it. It was like this: 
MARSH-WIGGLE. Some authorities reject this animal altogether as unfit for giants' consumption 
because of its stringy consistency and muddy flavour. 

The flavour can, however, be greatly reduced if- 
Jill touched his feet, and Scrubb's, gently. All three looked back at the giantess. Her mouth was slightly 
open and from her nose there came a sound which at that moment was more welcome to them than any 
music; she snored. 
And now it was a question of tiptoe work, not daring to go too fast, hardly daring to breathe, out through 
the scullery (giant sculleries smell horrid), out at last into the pale sunlight of a winter afternoon. 
They were at the top of a rough little path which ran steeply down. And, thank heavens, on the right side 
of the castle; the City Ruinous was in sight. In a few minutes they were back on the broad, steep road 
which led down from the main gate of the castle. They were also in full view from every single window 
on that side. If it had been one, or two, or five windows there'd be a reasonable chance that no one might 
be looking out. 
But there were nearer fifty than five. They now realized, too, that the road on which they were, and 
indeed all the ground between them and the City Ruinous, didn't offer as much cover as would hide a fox; 
it was all coarse grass and pebbles and flat stones. To make matters worse, they were now in the clothes 
that the giants had provided for them last night: except Puddleglum, whom nothing would fit. Jill wore a 
vivid green robe, rather too long for her, and over that a scarlet mantle fringed with white fur. 
Scrubb had scarlet stockings, blue tunic and cloak, a gold-hilted sword, and a feathered bonnet. 
"Nice bits of colour, you two are," muttered Puddleglum. "Show up very prettily on a winter day. The 
worst archer in the world couldn't miss either of you if you were in range. And talking of archers, we'll be 
sorry not to have our own bows before long, I shouldn't wonder. Bit thin, too, those clothes of yours, are 
they?" 
"Yes, I'm freezing already," said Jill. 
A few minutes ago when they had been in the kitchen, she had thought that if only they could once get 
out of the castle, their escape would be almost complete. She now realized that the most dangerous part of 
it was still to come. 

"Steady, steady," said Puddleglum. "Don't look back. Don't walk too quickly. Whatever you do, don't 
run. Look as if we were just taking a stroll, and then, if anyone sees us, he might, just possibly, not bother. 
The moment we look like people running away, we're done." 
The distance to the City Ruinous seemed longer than Jill would have believed possible. But bit by bit 
they were covering it. Then came a noise. 
The other two gasped. Jill, who didn't know what it was, said, "What's that?" 
"Hunting horn," whispered Scrubb. 
"But don't run even now," said Puddleglum. "Not until I give the word." 
This time Jill couldn't help glancing over her shoulder. There, about half a mile away, was the hunt 
returning from behind them on the left. 
They walked on. Suddenly a great clamour of giant voices arose: then shouts and hollas. 
"They've seen us. Run," said Puddleglum. 
Jill gathered up her long skirts - horrible things for running in - and ran. There was no mistaking the 
danger now. She could hear the music of the hounds. She could hear the King's voice roaring out, "After 
them, after them, or we'll have no man-pies tomorrow." 
She was last of the three now, cumbered with her dress, slipping on loose stones, her hair getting in her 
mouth, running-pains across her chest. The hounds were much nearer. Now she had to run uphill, up the 
stony slope which led to the lowest step of the giant stairway. She had no idea what they would do when 

they got there, or how they would be any better off even if they reached the top. 
But she didn't think about that. She was like a hunted animal now; as long as the pack was after her, she 
must run till she dropped. 
The Marsh-wiggle was ahead. As he came to the lowest step he stopped, looked a little to his right, and 
all of a sudden darted into a little hole or crevice at the bottom of it. His long legs, disappearing into it, 
looked very like those of a spider. Scrubb hesitated and then vanished after him. 
Jill, breathless and reeling, came to the place about a minute later. It was an unattractive hole - a crack 
between the earth and the stone about three feet long and hardly more than a foot high. You had to fling 
yourself flat on your face and crawl in. You couldn't do it so very quickly either. 
She felt sure that a dog's teeth would close on her heel before she had got inside. 
"Quick, quick. Stones. Fill up the opening," came Puddleglum's voice in the darkness beside her. It was 
pitch black in there, except for the grey light in the opening by which they had crawled in. The other two 
were working hard. She could see Scrubb's small hands and the Marshwiggle's big, frog-like hands black 
against the light, working desperately to pile up stones. Then she realized how important this was and 
began groping for large stones herself, and handing them to the others. Before the dogs were baying and 
yelping at the cave mouth, they had it pretty well filled; and now, of course, there was no light at all. 
"Farther in, quick," said Puddleglum's voice. 
"Let's all hold hands," said Jill. 
"Good idea," said Scrubb. But it took them quite a long time to find one another's hands in the darkness. 
The dogs were sniffing at the other side of the barrier now. 
"Try if we can stand up," suggested Scrubb. They did and found that they could. Then, Puddleglum 
holding out a hand behind him to Scrubb, and Scrubb holding a hand out behind him to Jill (who wished 
very much that she was the middle one of the party and not the last), they began groping with their feet 

and stumbling forwards into the blackness. It was all loose stones underfoot. Then Puddleglum came up 
to a wall of rock. They turned a little to their right and went on. There were a good many more twists and 
turns. Jill had now no sense of direction at all, and no idea where the mouth of the cave lay. 
"The question is," came Puddleglum's voice out of the darkness ahead, "whether, taking one thing with 
another, it wouldn't be better to go back (if we can) and give the giants a treat at that feast of theirs, 
instead of losing our way in the guts of a hill where, ten to one, there's dragons and deep holes and gases 
and water and - Ow! Let go! Save yourselves. I'm -" 
After that all happened quickly. There was a wild cry, a swishing, dusty, gravelly noise, a rattle of stones, 
and Jill found herself sliding, sliding, hopelessly sliding, and sliding quicker every moment down a slope 
that grew steeper every moment. It was not a smooth, firm slope, but a slope of small stones and rubbish. 
Even if you could have stood up, it would have been no use. Any bit of that slope you had put your foot 
on would have slid away from under you and carried you down with it. But Jill was more lying than 
standing. And the farther they all slid, the more they disturbed all the stones and earth, so that the general 
downward rush of everything (including themselves) got faster and louder and dustier and dirtier. From 
the sharp cries and swearing of the other two, Jill got the idea that many of the stones which she was 
dislodging were hitting Scrubb and Puddleglum pretty hard. And now she was going at a furious rate and 
felt sure she would be broken to bits at the bottom. 
Yet somehow they weren't. They were a mass of bruises, and the wet sticky stuff on her face appeared to 
be blood. And such a mass of loose earth, shingle, and larger stones was piled up round her (and partly 
over her) that she couldn't get up. The darkness was so complete that it made no difference at all whether 
you had your eyes open or shut. There was no noise. And that was the very worst moment Jill had ever 
known in her life. 
Supposing she was alone: supposing the others . . . Then she heard movements around her. And presently 
all three, in shaken voices, were explaining that none of them seemed to have any broken bones. 
"We can never get up that again," said Scrubb's voice. 
"And have you noticed how warm it is?" said the voice of Puddleglum. "That means we're a long way 
down. Might be nearly a mile." 
No one said anything. Some time later Puddleglum added: 

"My tinder-box has gone." 
After another long pause Jill said, "I'm terribly thirsty." 
No one suggested doing anything. There was so obviously nothing to be done. 
For the moment, they did not feel it quite so badly as one might have expected; that was because they 
were so tired. 
Long, long afterwards, without the slightest warning, an utterly strange voice spoke. They knew at once 
that it was not the one voice in the whole world for which each had secretly been hoping; the voice of 
Aslan. It was a dark, flat voice - almost, if you know what that means, a pitch-black voice. It said: 
"What make you here, creatures of the Overworld?" 
"WHO's there?" shouted the three travellers. 
"I am the Warden of the Marches of Underland, and with me stand a hundred Earthmen in arms," came 
the reply. "Tell me quickly who you are and what is your errand in the Deep Realm?" 
"We fell down by accident," said Puddleglum, truthfully enough. 
"Many fall down, and few return to the sunlit lands," said the voice. "Make ready now to come with me 
to the Queen of the Deep Realm." 

"What does she want with us?" asked Scrubb cautiously. 
"I do not know," said the voice. "Her will is not to be questioned but obeyed." 
While he said these words there was a noise like a soft explosion and immediately a cold light, grey with 
a little blue in it, flooded the cavern. All hope that the speaker had been idly boasting when he spoke of 
his hundred armed followers died at once. Jill found herself blinking and staring at a dense crowd. They 
were of all sizes, from little gnomes barely a foot high to stately figures taller than men. All carried threepronged 
spears in their hands, and all were dreadfully pale, and all stood as still as statues. Apart from 
that, they were very different; some had tails and others not, some wore great beards and others had very 
round, smooth faces, big as pumpkins. There were long, pointed noses, and long, soft noses like small 
trunks, and great blobby noses. Several had single horns in the middle of their foreheads. But in one 
respect they were all alike: every face in the whole hundred was as sad as a face could be. They were so 
sad that, after the first glance, Jill almost forgot to be afraid of them. She felt she would like to cheer them 
up. 
"Well!" said Puddleglum, rubbing his hands. "This is just what I needed. If these chaps don't teach me to 
take a serious view of life, I don't know what will. Look at that fellow with the walrus moustache - or that 
one with the -" 
"Get up," said the leader of the Earthmen. 
There was nothing else to be done. The three travellers scrambled to their feet and joined hands. One 
wanted the touch of a friend's hand at a moment like that. And the Earthmen came all round them, 
padding on large, soft feet, on which some had ten toes, some twelve, and others none. 
"March," said the Warden: and march they did. 
The cold light came from a large ball on the top of a long pole, and the tallest of the gnomes carried this 
at the head of the procession. By its cheerless rays they could see that they were in a natural cavern; the 
walls and roof were knobbed, twisted, and gashed into a thousand fantastic shapes, and the stony floor 
sloped downward as they proceeded. It was worse for Jill than for the others, because she hated dark, 
underground places. 

And when, as they went on, the cave got lower and narrower, and when, at last, the light-bearer stood 
aside, and the gnomes, one by one, stooped down (all except the very smallest ones) and stepped into a 
little dark crack and disappeared, she felt she could bear it no longer. 
"I can't go in there, I can't! I can't! I won't," she panted. The Earthmen said nothing but they all lowered 
their spears and pointed them at her. 
"Steady, Pole," said Puddleglum. "Those big fellows wouldn't be crawling in there if it didn't get wider 
later on. And there's one thing about this underground work, we shan't get any rain." 
"Oh, you don't understand. I can't," wailed Jill. 
"Think how 1 felt on that cliff, Pole," said Scrubb. "You go first, Puddleglum, and I'll come after her." 
"That's right," said the Marsh-wiggle, getting down on his hands and knees. 
"You keep a grip of my heels, Pole, and Scrubb will hold on to yours. Then we'll all be comfortable." 
"Comfortable!" said Jill. But she got down and they crawled in on their elbows. It was a nasty place. You 
had to go flat on your face for what seemed like half an hour, though it may really have been only five 
minutes. 
It was hot. Jill felt she was being smothered. But at last a dim light showed ahead, the tunnel grew wider 
and higher, and they came out, hot, dirty, and shaken, into a cave so large that it scarcely seemed like a 
cave at all. 
It was full of a dim, drowsy radiance, so that here they had no need of the Earthmen's strange lantern. 
The floor was soft with some kind of moss and out of this grew many strange shapes, branched and tall 
like trees, but flabby like mushrooms. They stood too far apart to make a forest; it was more like a park. 
The light (a greenish grey) seemed to come both from them and from the moss, and it was not strong 

enough to reach the roof of the cave, which must have been a long way overhead. Across the mild, soft, 
sleepy place they were now made to march. It was very sad, but with a quiet sort of sadness like soft 
music. 
Here they passed dozens of strange animals lying on the turf, either dead or asleep, Jill could not tell 
which. These were mostly of a dragonish or bat-like sort; Puddleglum did not know what any of them 
were. 
"Do they grow here?" Scrubb asked the Warden. He seemed very surprised at being spoken to, but 
replied, "No. They are all beasts that have found their way down by chasms and caves, out of Overland 
into the Deep Realm. 
Many come down, and few return to the sunlit lands. It is said that they will all wake at the end of the 
world." 
His mouth shut like a box when he had said this, and in the great silence of that cave the children felt that 
they would not dare to speak again. The bare feet of the gnomes, padding on the deep moss, made no 
sound. There was no wind, there were no birds, there was no sound of water. There was no sound of 
breathing from the strange beasts. 
When they had walked for several miles, they came to a wall of rock, and in it a low archway leading into 
another cavern. It was not, however, so bad as the last entrance and Jill could go through it without 
bending her head. 
It brought them into a smaller cave, long and narrow, about the shape and size of a cathedral. And here, 
filling almost the whole length of it, lay an enormous man fast asleep. He was far bigger than any of the 
giants, and his face was not like a giant's, but noble and beautiful. His breast rose and fell gently under the 
snowy beard which covered him to the waist. A pure, silver light (no one saw where it came from) rested 
upon him. 
"Who's that?" asked Puddleglum. And it was so long since anyone had spoken, that Jill wondered how he 
had the nerve. 
"That is old Father Time, who once was a King in Overland," said the Warden. "And now he has sunk 

down into the Deep Realm and lies dreaming of all the things that are done in the upper world. Many sink 
down, and few return to the sunlit lands. They say he will wake at the end of the world." 
And out of that cave they passed into another, and then into another and another, and so on till Jill lost 
count, but always they were going downhill and each cave was lower than the last, till the very thought of 
the weight and depth of earth above you was suffocating. At last they came to a place where the Warden 
commanded his cheerless lantern to be lit again. Then they passed into a cave so wide and dark that they 
could see nothing of it except that right in front of them a strip of pale sand ran down into still water. And 
there, beside a little jetty, lay a ship without mast or sail but with many oars. They were made to go on 
board her and led forward to the bows where there was a clear space in front of the rowers' benches and a 
seat running round inside the bulwarks. 
"One thing I'd like to know," said Puddleglum, "is whether anyone from our world - from up-a-top, I 
mean has ever done this trip before?" 
"Many have taken ship at the pale beaches," replied the Warden, "and-" 
"Yes, I know," interrupted Puddleglum. "And few return to the sunlit lands. 
You needn't say it again. You are a chap of one idea, aren't you?" 
The children huddled close together on each side of Puddleglum. They had thought him a wet blanket 
while they were still above ground, but down here he seemed the only comforting thing they had. Then 
the pale lantern was hung up amidships, the Earthmen sat to the oars, and the ship began to move. The 
lantern cast its light only a very short way. Looking ahead, they could see nothing but smooth, dark water, 
fading into absolute blackness. 
"Oh, whatever will become of us?" said Jill despairingly. 
"Now don't you let your spirits down, Pole," said the Marsh-wiggle. 
"There's one thing you've got to remember. We're back on the right lines. 

We were to go under the Ruined City, and we are under it. We're following the instructions again." 
Presently they were given food - flat, flabby cakes of some sort which had hardly any taste. And after 
that, they gradually fell asleep. But when they woke, everything was just the same; the gnomes still 
rowing, the ship still gliding on, still dead blackness ahead. How often they woke and slept and ate and 
slept again, none of them could ever remember. And the worst thing about it was that you began to feel as 
if you had always lived on that ship, in that darkness, and to wonder whether sun and blue skies and wind 
and birds had not been only a dream. 
They had almost given up hoping or being afraid about anything when at last they saw lights ahead: 
dreary lights, like that of their own lantern. Then, quite suddenly, one of these lights came close and they 
saw that they were passing another ship. After that they met several ships. Then, staring till their eyes 
hurt, they saw that some of the lights ahead were shining on what looked like wharfs, walls, towers, and 
moving crowds. But still there was hardly any noise. 
"By Jove," said Scrubb. "A city!" and soon they all saw that he was right. 
But it was a queer city. The lights were so few and far apart that they would hardly have done for 
scattered cottages in our world. But the little bits of the place which you could see by the lights were like 
glimpses of a great seaport. You could make out in one place a whole crowd of ships loading or 
unloading; in another, bales of stuff and warehouses; in a third, walls and pillars that suggested great 
palaces or temples; and always, wherever the light fell, endless crowds - hundreds of Earthmen, jostling 
one another as they padded softly about their business in narrow streets, broad squares, or up great flights 
of steps. Their continued movement made a sort of soft, murmuring noise as the ship drew nearer and 
nearer; but there was not a song or a shout or a bell or the rattle of a wheel anywhere. The City was as 
quiet, and nearly as dark, as the inside of an ant-hill. 
At last their ship was brought alongside a quay and made fast. The three travellers were taken ashore and 
marched up into the City. Crowds of Earthmen, no two alike, rubbed shoulders with them in the crowded 
streets, and the sad light fell on many sad and grotesque faces. But no one showed any interest in the 
strangers. Every gnome seemed to be as busy as it was sad, though Jill never found what they were so 
busy about. But the endless moving, shoving, hurrying, and the soft pad-pad-pad went on. 
At last they came to what appeared to be a great castle, though few of the windows in it were lighted. 
Here they were taken in and made to cross a courtyard, and to climb many staircases. This brought them 

in the end to a great murkily lit room. But in one corner of it - oh joy! - there was an archway filled with a 
quite different sort of light; the honest, yellowish, warm light of such a lamp as humans use. What showed 
by this light inside the archway was the foot of a staircase which wound upward between walls of stone. 
The light seemed to come from the top. Two Earthmen stood one on each side of the arch like sentries, or 
footmen. 
The Warden went up to these two, and said, as if it were a password: 
"Many sink down to the Underworld." 
"And few return to the sunlit lands," they answered, as if it were the countersign. Then all three put their 
heads together and talked. At last one of the two gnomes-in-waiting said, "I tell you the Queen's grace is 
gone from hence on her great affair. We had best keep these top dwellers in strait prison till her 
homecoming. Few return to the sunlit lands." 
At that moment the conversation was interrupted by what seemed to Jill the most delightful noise in the 
world. It came from above, from the top of the staircase; and it was a clear, ringing, perfectly human 
voice, the voice of a young man. 
"What coil are you keeping down there, Mullugutherum?" it shouted. 
"Overworlders, ha! Bring them up to me, and that presently." 
"Please it your Highness to remember," began Mullugutherum, but the voice cut him short. 
"It pleases my Highness principally to be obeyed, old mutterer. Bring them up," it called. 
Mullugutherum shook his head, motioned to the travellers to follow and began going up the staircase. At 
every step the light increased. There were rich tapestries hanging on the walls. The lamplight shone 
golden through thin curtains at the staircase-head. The Earthmen parted the curtains and stood aside. The 
three passed in. They were in a beautiful room, richly tapestried, with a bright fire on a clean hearth, and 
red wine and cut glass sparkling on the table. A young man with fair hair rose to greet them. He was 

handsome and looked both bold and kind, though there was something about his face that didn't seem 
quite right. He was dressed in black and altogether looked a little bit like Hamlet. 
"Welcome, Overworlders," he cried. "But stay a moment! I cry you mercy! I have seen you two fair 
children, and this, your strange governor, before. 
Was it not you three that met me by the bridge on the borders of Ettinsmoor when I rode there by my 
Lady's side?" 
"Oh . . . you were the black knight who never spoke?" exclaimed Jill. 
"And was that lady the Queen of Underland?" asked Puddleglum, in no very friendly voice. And Scrubb, 
who was thinking the same, burst out, "Because if it was, I think she was jolly mean to send us off to a 
castle of giants who intended to eat us. What harm had we ever done her, I should like to know?" 
"How?" said the Black Knight with a frown. "If you were not so young a warrior, Boy, you and I must 
have fought to the death on this quarrel. I can hear no words against my Lady's honour. But of this you 
may be assured, that whatever she said to you, she said of a good intent. You do not know her. She is a 
nosegay of all virtues, as truth, mercy, constancy, gentleness, courage, and the rest. I say what I know. 
Her kindness to me alone, who can in no way reward her, would make an admirable history. But you shall 
know and love her hereafter. Meanwhile, what is your errand in the Deep Lands?" 
And before Puddleglum could stop her, Jill blurted out, "Please we are trying to find Prince Rilian of 
Narnia." And then she realized what a frightful risk she had taken; these people might be enemies. But the 
Knight showed no interest. 
"Rilian? Narnia?" he said carelessly. "Narnia? What land is that? I have never heard the name. It must be 
a thousand leagues from those parts of the Overworld that I know. But it was a strange fantasy that 
brought you seeking this - how do you call him? - Billian? Trillian? in my Lady's realm. Indeed, to my 
certain knowledge, there is no such man here." He laughed very loudly at this, and Jill thought to herself, 
"I wonder is that what's wrong with his face? Is he a bit silly?" 
"We had been told to look for a message on the stones of the City Ruinous," said Scrubb. "And we saw 
the words UNDER ME." 

The Knight laughed even more heartily than before. "You were the more deceived," he said. "Those 
words meant nothing to your purpose. Had you but asked my Lady, she could have given you better 
counsel. For those words are all that is left of a longer script, which in ancient times, as she well 
remembers, expressed this verse: 
Though under Earth and throneless now I be, Yet, while I lived, all Earth was under me. 
From which it is plain that some great king of the ancient giants, who lies buried there, caused this boast 
to be cut in the stone over his sepulchre; though the breaking up of some stones, and the carrying away of 
others for new buildings, and the filling up of the cuts with rubble, has left only two words that can still be 
read. Is it not the merriest jest in the world that you should have thought they were written to you?" 
This was like cold water down the back to Scrubb and 
Jill; for it seemed to them very likely that the words had nothing to do with their quest at all, and that 
they had been taken in by a mere accident. 
"Don't you mind him," said Puddleglum. "There are no accidents. Our guide is Aslan; and he was there 
when the giant King caused the letters to be cut, and he knew already all things that would come of them; 
including this." 
"This guide of yours must be a long liver, friend," said the Knight with another of his laughs. 
Jill began to find them a little irritating. 
"And it seems to me, Sir," answered Puddleglum, "that this Lady of yours must be a long liver too, if she 
remembers the verse as it was when they first cut it." 
"Very shrewd, Frog-face," said the Knight, clapping Puddleglum on the shoulder and laughing again. 

"And you have hit the truth. She is of divine race, and knows neither age nor death. I am the more 
thankful to her for all her infinite bounty to such a poor mortal wretch as I. For you must know, Sirs, I am 
a man under most strange afflictions, and none but the Queen's grace would have had patience with me. 
Patience, said I? But it goes far beyond that. She has promised me a great kingdom in Overland, and, 
when I am king, her own most gracious hand in marriage. But the tale is too long for you to hear fasting 
and standing. Hi there, some of you! Bring wine and Updwellers' food for my guests. Please you, be 
seated, gentlemen. 
Little maiden, sit in this chair. You shall hear it all." 
WHEN the meal (which was pigeon pie, cold ham, salad, and cakes) had been brought, and all had drawn 
their chairs up to the table and begun, the Knight continued: 
"You must understand, friends, that I know nothing of who I was and whence I came into this Dark 
World. I remember no time when I was not dwelling, as now, at the court of this all but heavenly Queen; 
but my thought is that she saved me from some evil enchantment and brought me hither of her exceeding 
bounty. (Honest Frogfoot, your cup is empty. Suffer me to refill it.) And this seems to me the likelier 
because even now I am bound by a spell, from which my Lady alone can free me. Every night there 
comes an hour when my mind is most horribly changed, and, after my mind, my body. 
For first I become furious and wild and would rush upon my dearest friends to kill them, if I were not 
bound. And soon after that, I turn into the likeness of a great serpent, hungry, fierce, and deadly. (Sir, be 
pleased to take another breast of pigeon, I entreat you.) So they tell me, and they certainly speak truth, for 
my Lady says the same. I myself know nothing of it, for when my hour is past I awake forgetful of all that 
vile fit and in my proper shape and sound mind - saving that I am somewhat wearied. (Little lady, eat one 
of these honey cakes, which are brought for me from some barbarous land in the far south of the world.) 
Now the Queen's majesty knows by her art that I shall be freed from this enchantment when once she has 
made me king of a land in the Overworld and set its crown upon my head. 
The land is already chosen and the very place of our breaking out. Her Earthmen have worked day and 
night digging a way beneath it, and have now gone so far and so high that they tunnel not a score of feet 
beneath the very grass on which the Updwellers of that country walk. It will be very soon now that those 
Uplanders' fate will come upon them. She herself is at the diggings tonight, and I expect a message to go 
to her. Then the thin roof of earth which still keeps me from my kingdom will be broken through, and 
with her to guide me and a thousand Earthmen at my back, I shall ride forth in arms, fall suddenly on our 

enemies, slay their chief men, cast down their strong places, and doubtless be their crowned king within 
four and twenty hours." 
"It's a bit rough luck on them, isn't it?" said Scrubb. 
"Thou art a lad of a wondrous, quick-working wit!" exclaimed the Knight. 
"For, on my honour, I had never thought of it so before. I see your meaning." He looked slightly, very 
slightly troubled for a moment or two; but his face soon cleared and he broke out, with another of his loud 
laughs, "But fie on gravity! Is it not the most comical and ridiculous thing in the world to think of them all 
going about their business and never dreaming that under their peaceful fields and floors, only a fathom 
down, there is a great army ready to break out upon them like a fountain! And they never to have 
suspected! Why, they themselves, when once the first smart of their defeat is over, can hardly choose but 
laugh at the thought!" 
"I don't think it's funny at all," said Jill. "I think you'll be a wicked tyrant." 
"What?" said the Knight, still laughing and patting her head in a quite infuriating fashion. "Is our little 
maid a deep politician? But never fear, sweetheart. In ruling that land, I shall do all by the counsel of my 
Lady, who will then be my Queen too. Her word shall be my law, even as my word will be law to the 
people we have conquered." 
"Where I come from," said Jill, who was disliking him more every minute, "they don't think much of men 
who are bossed about by their wives." 
"Shalt think otherwise when thou hast a man of thine own, I warrant you," said the Knight, apparently 
thinking this very funny. "But with my Lady, it is another matter. I am well content to live by her word, 
who has already saved me from a thousand dangers. No mother has taken pains more tenderly for her 
child, than the Queen's grace has for me. Why, look you, amid all her cares and business, she rideth out 
with me in the Overworld many a time and oft to accustom my eyes to the sunlight. And then I must go 
fully armed and with visor down, so that no man may see my face, and I must speak to no one. For she 
has found out by art magical that this would hinder my deliverance from the grievous enchantment I lie 
under. Is not that a lady worthy of a man's whole worship?" 

"Sounds a very nice lady indeed," said Puddleglum in a voice which meant exactly the opposite. 
They were thoroughly tired of the Knight's talk before they had finished supper. Puddleglum was 
thinking, "I wonder what game that witch is really playing with this young fool." Scrubb was thinking, 
"He's a great baby, really: tied to that woman's apron strings; he's a sap." And Jill was thinking, "He's the 
silliest, most conceited, selfish pig I've met for a long time." But when the meal was over, the Knight's 
mood had changed. 
There was no more laughter about him. 
"Friends," he said, "my hour is now very near. I am ashamed that you should see me yet I dread being left 
alone. They will come in presently and bind me hand and foot to yonder chair. Alas, so it must be: for in 
my fury, they tell me, I would destroy all that I could reach." 
"I say," said Scrubb, "I'm awfully sorry about your enchantment of course, but what will those fellows do 
to us when they come to bind you? They talked of putting us in prison. And we don't like all those dark 
places very much. We'd much rather stay here till you're . . . better . . . if we may." 
"It is well thought of," said the Knight. "By custom none but the Queen herself remains with me in my 
evil hour. Such is her tender care for my honour that she would not willingly suffer any ears but her own 
to hear the words I utter in that frenzy. But I could not easily persuade my attendant gnomes that you 
should be left with me. And I think I hear their soft feet even now upon the stairs. Go through yonder 
door: it leads into my other apartments. And there, either await my coming when they have unbound me; 
or, if you will, return and sit with me in my ravings." 
They followed his directions and passed out of the room by a door which they had not yet seen opened. It 
brought them, they were pleased to see, not into darkness but into a lighted corridor. They tried various 
doors and found (what they very badly needed) water for washing and even a looking glass. "He never 
offered us a wash before supper," said Jill, drying her face. "Selfish, selfcentred pig." 
"Are we going back to watch the enchantment, or shall we stay here?" said Scrubb. 
"Stay here, I vote," said Jill. "I'd much rather not see it." But she felt a little inquisitive all the same. 

"No, go back," said Puddleglum. "We may pick up some information, and we need all we can get. I am 
sure that Queen is a witch and an enemy. And those Earthmen would knock us on the head as soon as 
look at us. There's a stronger smell of danger and lies and magic and treason about this land than I've ever 
smelled before. We need to keep our eyes and ears open." 
They went back down the corridor and gently pushed the door open. "It's all right," said Scrubb, meaning 
that there were no Earthmen about. Then they all came back into the room where they had supped. 
The main door was now shut, concealing the curtain between which they had first entered. The Knight 
was seated in a curious silver chair, to which he was bound by his ankles, his knees, his elbows, his 
wrists, and his waist. 
There was sweat on his forehead and his face was filled with anguish. 
"Come in, friends," he said, glancing quickly up. "The fit is not yet upon me. Make no noise, for I told 
that prying chamberlain that you were in bed. 
Now . . . I can feel it coming. Quick! Listen while I am master of myself. 
When the fit is upon me, it well may be that I shall beg and implore you, with entreaties and threatenings, 
to loosen my bonds. They say I do. I shall call upon you by all that is most dear and most dreadful. But do 
not listen to me. Harden your hearts and stop your ears. For while I am bound you are safe. But if once I 
were up and out of this chair, then first would come my fury, and after that" - he shuddered - "the change 
into a loathsome serpent." 
"There's no fear of our loosing you," said Puddleglum. "We've no wish to meet wild men; or serpents 
either." 
"I should think not," said Scrubb and Jill together. 

"All the same," added Puddleglum in a whisper. "Don't let's be too sure. 
Let's be on our guard. We've muffed everything else, you know. He'll be cunning, I shouldn't wonder, 
once he gets started. Can we trust one another? Do we all promise that whatever he says we don't touch 
those cords? Whatever he says, mind you?" 
"Rather!" said Scrubb. 
"There's nothing in the world he can say or do that'll make me change my mind," said Jill. 
"Hush! Something's happening," said Puddleglum. 
The Knight was moaning. His face was as pale as putty, and he writhed in his bonds. And whether 
because she was sorry for him, or for some other reason, Jill thought that he looked a nicer sort of man 
than he had looked before. 
"Ah," he groaned. "Enchantments, enchantments . . . the heavy, tangled, cold, clammy web of evil magic. 
Buried alive. Dragged down under the earth, down into the sooty blackness . . . how many years is it? . . . 
Have I lived ten years, or a thousand years, in the pit? Maggotmen all around me. 
Oh, have mercy. Let me out, let me go back. Let me feel the wind and see the sky . . . There used to be a 
little pool. When you looked down into it you could see all the trees growing upside-down in the water, 
all green, and below them, deep, very deep, the blue sky." 
He had been speaking in a low voice; now he looked up, fixed his eyes upon them, and said loud and 
clear: 
"Quick! I am sane now. Every night I am sane. If only I could get out of this enchanted chair, it would 
last. I should be a man again. But every night they bind me, and so every night my chance is gone. But 
you are not enemies. I am not your prisoner. Quick! Cut these cords." 

"Stand fast! Steady," said Puddleglum to the two children. 
"I beseech you to hear me," said the Knight, forcing himself to speak calmly. "Have they told you that if I 
am released from this chair I shall kill you and become a serpent? I see by your faces that they have. It is a 
lie. It is at this hour that I am in my right mind: it is all the rest of the day that I am enchanted. You are not 
Earthmen nor witches. Why should you be on their side? Of your courtesy, cut my bonds." 
"Steady! Steady! Steady!" said the three travellers to one another. 
"Oh, you have hearts of stone," said the Knight. "Believe me, you look upon a wretch who has suffered 
almost more than any mortal can bear. What wrong have I ever done you, that you should side with my 
enemies to keep me in such miseries? And the minutes are slipping past. Now you can save me; when this 
hour has passed, I shall be witless again - the toy and lap-dog, nay, more likely the pawn and tool, of the 
most devilish sorceress that ever planned the woe of men. And this night, of all nights, when she is away! 
You take from me a chance that may never come again." 
"This is dreadful. I do wish we'd stayed away till it was over," said Jill. 
"Steady!" said Puddleglum. 
The prisoner's voice was now rising into a shriek. "Let me go, I say. Give me my sword. My sword! 
Once I am free I shall take such revenge on Earthmen that Underland will talk of it for a thousand years!" 
"Now the frenzy is beginning," said Scrubb. "I hope those knots are all right." 
"Yes," said Puddleglum. "He'd have twice his natural strength if he got free now. And I'm not clever with 
my sword. He'd get us both, I shouldn't wonder; and then Pole on her own would be left to tackle the 
snake." 
The prisoner was now so straining at his bonds that they cut into his wrists and ankles. "Beware," he said. 
"Beware. One night I did break them. 

But the witch was there that time. You will not have her to help you tonight. Free me now, and I am your 
friend. I'm your mortal enemy else." 
"Cunning, isn't he?" said Puddleglum. 
"Once and for all," said the prisoner, "I adjure you to set me free. By all fears and all loves, by the bright 
skies of Overland, by the great Lion, by Aslan himself, I charge you -" 
"Oh!" cried the three travellers as though they had been hurt. "It's the sign," said Puddleglum. "It was the 
words of the sign," said Scrubb more cautiously. "Oh, what are we to do?" said Jill. 
It was a dreadful question. What had been the use of promising one another that they would not on any 
account set the Knight free, if they were now to do so the first time he happened to call upon a name they 
really cared about? On the other hand, what had been the use of learning the signs if they weren't going to 
obey them? Yet could Aslan have really meant them to unbind anyone even a lunatic - who asked it in his 
name? Could it be a mere accident? Or how if the Queen of the Underworld knew all about the signs and 
had made the Knight learn this name simply in order to entrap them? But then, supposing this was the real 
sign? . . . They had muffed three already; they daren't muff the fourth. 
"Oh, if only we knew!" said Jill. 
"I think we do know," said Puddleglum. 
"Do you mean you think everything will come right if we do untie him?" said Scrubb. 
"I don't know about that," said Puddleglum. "You see, Aslan didn't tell Pole what would happen. He only 
told her what to do. That fellow will be the death of us once he's up, I shouldn't wonder. But that doesn't 
let us off following the sign." 

They all stood looking at one another with bright eyes. It was a sickening moment. "All right!" said Jill 
suddenly. "Let's get it over. Good-bye, everyone ...!" They all shook hands. The Knight was screaming by 
now; there was foam on his cheeks. 
"Come on, Scrubb," said Puddleglum. He and Scrubb drew their swords and went over to the captive. 
"In the name of Aslan," they said and began methodically cutting the cords. 
The instant the prisoner was free, he crossed the room in a single bound, seized his own sword (which 
had been taken from him and laid on the table), and drew it. 
"You first!" he cried and fell upon the silver chair. That must have been a good sword. The silver gave 
way before its edge like string, and in a moment a few twisted fragments, shining on the floor, were all 
that was left. But as the chair broke, there came from it a bright flash, a sound like small thunder, and (for 
one moment) a loathsome smell. 
"Lie there, vile engine of sorcery," he said, "lest your mistress should ever use you for another victim." 
Then he turned and surveyed his rescuers; and the something wrong, whatever it was, had vanished from 
his face. 
"What?" he cried, turning to Puddleglum. "Do I see before me a Marsh-wiggle - a real, live, honest, 
Narnian Marsh-wiggle?" 
"Oh, so you have heard of Narnia after all?" said Jill. 
"Had I forgotten it when I was under the spell?" asked the Knight. "Well, that and all other bedevilments 
are now over. You may well believe that I know Narnia, for I am Rilian, Prince of Narnia, and Caspian 
the great King is my father." 
"Your Royal Highness," said Puddleglum, sinking on one knee (and the children did the same), "we have 
come hither for no other end than to seek you." 

"And who are you, my other deliverers?" said the Prince to Scrubb and Jill. 
"We were sent by Aslan himself from beyond the world's end to seek your Highness," said Scrubb. "I am 
Eustace who sailed with him to the island of Ramandu." 
"I owe all three of you a greater debt than I can ever pay," said Prince Rilian. "But my father? Is he yet 
alive?" 
"He sailed east again before we left Narnia, my lord," said Puddleglum. 
"But your Highness must consider that the King is very old. It is ten to one his Majesty must die on the 
voyage." 
"He is old, you say. How long then have I been in the power of the witch?' 
"It is more than ten years since your Highness was lost in the woods at the north side of Narnia." 
"Ten years!" said the Prince, drawing his hand across his face as if to rub away the past. "Yes, I believe 
you. For now that I am myself I can remember that enchanted life, though while I was enchanted I could 
not remember my true self. And now, fair friends - but wait! I hear their feet (does it not sicken a man, 
that padding woolly tread! faugh!) on the stairs. Lock the door, boy. Or stay. I have a better thought than 
that. I will fool these Earthmen, if Aslan gives me the wit. Take your cue from me." 
He walked resolutely to the door and flung it wide open. 

TWO Earthmen entered, but instead of advancing into the room, they placed themselves one on each side 
of the door, and bowed deeply. They were followed immediately by the last person whom anyone had 
expected or wished to see: the Lady of the Green Kirtle, the Queen of Underland. She stood dead still in 
the doorway, and they could see her eyes moving as she took in the whole situation - the three strangers, 
the silver chair destroyed, and the Prince free, with his sword in his hand. 
She turned very white; but Jill thought it was the sort of whiteness that comes over some people's faces 
not when they are frightened but when they are angry. For a moment the Witch fixed her eyes on the 
Prince, and there was murder in them. Then she seemed to change her mind. 
"Leave us," she said to the two Earthmen. "And let none disturb us till I call, on pain of death." The 
gnomes padded away obediently, and the Witch-queen shut and locked the door. 
"How now, my lord Prince," she said. "Has your nightly fit not yet come upon you, or is it over so soon? 
Why stand you here unbound? Who are these aliens? And is it they who have destroyed the chair which 
was your only safety?" 
Prince Rilian shivered as she spoke to him. And no wonder: it is not easy to throw off in half an hour an 
enchantment which has made one a slave for ten years. Then, speaking with a great effort, he said: 
"Madam, there will be no more need of that chair. And you, who have told me a hundred times how 
deeply you pitied me for the sorceries by which I was bound, will doubtless hear with joy that they are 
now ended for ever. There was, it seems, some small error in your Ladyship's way of treating them. 
These, my true friends, have delivered me. I am now in my right mind, and there are two things I will say 
to you. First - as for your Ladyship's design of putting me at the head of an army of Earthmen so that I 
may break out into the Overworld and there, by main force, make myself king over some nation that never 
did me wrong - murdering their natural lords and holding their throne as a bloody and foreign tyrant - now 
that I know myself, I do utterly abhor and renounce it as plain villainy. And second: I am the King's son 
of Narnia, Rilian, the only child of Caspian, Tenth of that name, whom some call Caspian the Seafarer. 
Therefore, Madam, it is my purpose, as it is also my duty, to depart suddenly from your Highness's court 
into my own country. Please it you to grant me and my friends safe conduct and a guide through your 
dark realm." 
Now the Witch said nothing at all, but moved gently across the room, always keeping her face and eyes 
very steadily towards the Prince. When she had come to a little ark set in the wall not far from the 

fireplace, she opened it, and took out first a handful of a green powder. This she threw on the fire. It did 
not blaze much, but a very sweet and drowsy smell came from it. And all through the conversation which 
followed, that smell grew stronger, and filled the room, and made it harder to think. Secondly, she took 
out a musical instrument rather like a mandolin. She began to play it with her fingers - a steady, 
monotonous thrumming that you didn't notice after a few minutes. But the less you noticed it, the more it 
got into your brain and your blood. This also made it hard to think. After she had thrummed for a time 
(and the sweet smell was now strong) she began speaking in a sweet, quiet voice. 
"Narnia?" she said. "Narnia? I have often heard your Lordship utter that name in your ravings. Dear 
Prince, you are very sick. There is no land called Narnia." 
"Yes there is, though, Ma'am," said Puddleglum. "You see, I happen to have lived there all my life." 
"Indeed," said the Witch. "Tell me, I pray you, where that country is?" 
"Up there," said Puddleglum, stoutly, pointing overhead. "I - I don't know exactly where." 
"How?" said the Queen, with a kind, soft, musical laugh. "Is there a country up among the stones and 
mortar of the roof?" 
"No," said Puddleglum, struggling a little to get his breath. "It's in Overworld." 
"And what, or where, pray is this . . . how do you call it. . . Overworld?" 
"Oh, don't be so silly," said Scrubb, who was fighting hard against the enchantment of the sweet smell 
and the thrumming. "As if you didn't know! It's up above, up where you can see the sky and the sun and 
the stars. Why, you've been there yourself. We met you there." 
"I cry you mercy, little brother," laughed the Witch (you couldn't have heard a lovelier laugh). "I have no 
memory of that meeting. But we often meet our friends in strange places when we dream. And unless all 
dreamed alike, you must not ask them to remember it." 

"Madam," said the Prince sternly, "I have already told your Grace that I am the King's son of Narnia." 
"And shalt be, dear friend," said the Witch in a soothing voice, as if she was humouring a child, "shalt be 
king of many imagined lands in thy fancies." 
"We've been there, too," snapped Jill. She was very angry because she could feel enchantment getting 
hold of her every moment. But of course the very fact that she could still feel it, showed that it had not yet 
fully worked. 
"And thou art Queen of Narnia too, I doubt not, pretty one," said the Witch in the same coaxing, halfmocking 
tone. 
"I'm nothing of the sort," said Jill, stamping her foot. "We come from another world." 
"Why, this is a prettier game than the other," said the Witch. "Tell us, little maid, where is this other 
world? What ships and chariots go between it and ours?" 
Of course a lot of things darted into Jill's head at once: Experiment House, Adela Pennyfather, her own 
home, radio-sets, cinemas, cars, aeroplanes, ration-books, queues. But they seemed dim and far away. 
(Thrum thrum - thrum - went the strings of the Witch's instrument.) Jill couldn't remember the names of 
the things in our world. And this time it didn't come into her head that she was being enchanted, for now 
the magic was in its full strength; and of course, the more enchanted you get, the more certain you feel 
that you are not enchanted at all. She found herself saying (and at the moment it was a relief to say): 
"No. I suppose that other world must be all a dream." 
"Yes. It is all a dream," said the Witch, always thrumming. 
"Yes, all a dream," said Jill. 

"There never was such a world," said the Witch. 
"No," said Jill and Scrubb, "never was such a world." 
"There never was any world but mine," said the Witch. 
"There never was any world but yours," said they. 
Puddleglum was still fighting hard. "I don't know rightly what you all mean by a world," he said, talking 
like a man who hasn't enough air. "But you can play that fiddle till your fingers drop off, and still you 
won't make me forget Narnia; and the whole Overworld too. We'll never see it again, I shouldn't wonder. 
You may have blotted it out and turned it dark like this, for all I know. Nothing more likely. But I know I 
was there once. I've seen the sky full of stars. I've seen the sun coming up out of the sea of a morning and 
sinking behind the mountains at night. And I've seen him up in the midday sky when I couldn't look at 
him for brightness." 
Puddleglum's words had a very rousing effect. The other three all breathed again and looked at one 
another like people newly awaked. 
"Why, there it is!" cried the Prince. "Of course! The blessing of Aslan upon this honest Marsh-wiggle. 
We have all been dreaming, these last few minutes. How could we have forgotten it? Of course we've all 
seen the sun." 
"By Jove, so we have!" said Scrubb. "Good for you, Puddleglum! You're the only one of us with any 
sense, I do believe." 
Then came the Witch's voice, cooing softly like the voice of a wood-pigeon from the high elms in an old 
garden at three o'clock in the middle of a sleepy, summer afternoon; and it said: 
"What is this sun that you all speak of? Do you mean anything by the word?" 

"Yes, we jolly well do," said Scrubb. 
"Can you tell me what it's like?" asked the Witch (thrum, thrum, thrum, went the strings). 
"Please it your Grace," said the Prince, very coldly and politely. "You see that lamp. It is round and 
yellow and gives light to the whole room; and hangeth moreover from the roof. Now that thing which we 
call the sun is like the lamp, only far greater and brighter. It giveth light to the whole Overworld and 
hangeth in the sky." 
"Hangeth from what, my lord?" asked the Witch; and then, while they were all still thinking how to 
answer her, she added, with another of her soft, silver laughs: "You see? When you try to think out clearly 
what this sun must be, you cannot tell me. You can only tell me it is like the lamp. Your sun is a dream; 
and there is nothing in that dream that was not copied from the lamp. The lamp is the real thing; the sun is 
but a tale, a children's story." 
"Yes, I see now," said Jill in a heavy, hopeless tone. "It must be so." And while she said this, it seemed to 
her to be very good sense. 
Slowly and gravely the Witch repeated, "There is no sun." And they all said nothing. She repeated, in a 
softer and deeper voice. "There is no sun." After a pause, and after a struggle in their minds, all four of 
them said together. "You are right. There is no sun." It was such a relief to give in and say it. 
"There never was a sun," said the Witch. 
"No. There never was a sun," said the Prince, and the Marsh-wiggle, and the children. 
For the last few minutes Jill had been feeling that there was something she must remember at all costs. 
And now she did. But it was dreadfully hard to say it. She felt as if huge weights were laid on her lips. At 
last, with an effort that seemed to take all the good out of her, she said: 

"There's Aslan." 
"Aslan?" said the Witch, quickening ever so slightly the pace of her thrumming. "What a pretty name! 
What does it mean?" 
"He is the great Lion who called us out of our own world," said Scrubb, "and sent us into this to find 
Prince Rilian." 
"What is a lion?" asked the Witch. 
"Oh, hang it all!" said Scrubb. "Don't you know? How can we describe it to her? Have you ever seen a 
cat?" 
"Surely," said the Queen. "I love cats." 
"Well, a lion is a little bit - only a little bit, mind you like a huge cat - with a mane. At least, it's not like a 
horse's mane, you know, it's more like a judge's wig. And it's yellow. And terrifically strong." 
The Witch shook her head. "I see," she said, "that we should do no better with your lion, as you call it, 
than we did with your sun. You have seen lamps, and so you imagined a bigger and better lamp and called 
it the sun. 
You've seen cats, and now you want a bigger and better cat, and it's to be called a lion. Well, 'tis a pretty 
makebelieve, though, to say truth, it would suit you all better if you were younger. And look how you can 
put nothing into your make-believe without copying it from the real world, this world of mine, which is 
the only world. But even you children are too old for such play. As for you, my lord Prince, that art a man 
full grown, fie upon you! Are you not ashamed of such toys? Come, all of you. Put away these childish 
tricks. I have work for you all in the real world. There is no Narnia, no Overworld, no sky, no sun, no 
Aslan. And now, to bed all. And let us begin a wiser life tomorrow. But, first, to bed; to sleep; deep sleep, 
soft pillows, sleep without foolish dreams." 

The Prince and the two children were standing with their heads hung down, their cheeks flushed, their 
eyes half closed; the strength all gone from them; the enchantment almost complete. But Puddleglum, 
desperately gathering all his strength, walked over to the fire. Then he did a very brave thing. He knew it 
wouldn't hurt him quite as much as it would hurt a human; for his feet (which were bare) were webbed 
and hard and coldblooded like a duck's. But he knew it would hurt him badly enough; and so it did. 
With his bare foot he stamped on the fire, grinding a large part of it into ashes on the flat hearth. And 
three things happened at once. 
First, the sweet heavy smell grew very much less. For though the whole fire had not been put out, a good 
bit of it had, and what remained smelled very largely of burnt Marsh-wiggle, which is not at all an 
enchanting smell. 
This instantly made everyone's brain far clearer. The Prince and the children held up their heads again 
and opened their eyes. 
Secondly, the Witch, in a loud, terrible voice, utterly different from all the sweet tones she had been 
using up till now, called out, "What are you doing? Dare to touch my fire again, mud-filth, and I'll turn the 
blood to fire inside your veins." 
Thirdly, the pain itself made Puddleglum's head for a moment perfectly clear and he knew exactly what 
he really thought. There is nothing like a good shock of pain for dissolving certain kinds of magic. 
"One word, Ma'am," he said, coming back from the fire; limping, because of the pain. "One word. All 
you've been saying is quite right, I shouldn't wonder. I'm a chap who always liked to know the worst and 
then put the best face I can on it. So I won't deny any of what you said. But there's one thing more to be 
said, even so. Suppose we have only dreamed, or made up, all those things - trees and grass and sun and 
moon and stars and Aslan himself. Suppose we have. Then all I can say is that, in that case, the made-up 
things seem a good deal more important than the real ones. Suppose this black pit of a kingdom of yours 
is the only world. Well, it strikes me as a pretty poor one. And that's a funny thing, when you come to 
think of it. We're just babies making up a game, if you're right. But four babies playing a game can make 
a playworld which licks your real world hollow. 
That's why I'm going to stand by the play-world. I'm on Aslan's side even if there isn't any Aslan to lead 
it. I'm going to live as like a Narnian as I can even if there isn't any Narnia. So, thanking you kindly for 
our supper, if these two gentlemen and the young lady are ready, we're leaving your court at once and 

setting out in the dark to spend our lives looking for Overland. Not that our lives will be very long, I 
should think; but that's a small loss if the world's as dull a place as you say." 
"Oh, hurrah! Good old Puddleglum!" cried Scrubb and Jill. But the Prince shouted suddenly, "Ware! 
Look to the Witch." 
When they did look their hair nearly stood on end. 
The instrument dropped from her hands. Her arms appeared to be fastened to her sides. Her legs were 
intertwined with each other, and her feet had disappeared. The long green train of her skirt thickened and 
grew solid, and seemed to be all one piece with the writhing green pillar of her interlocked legs. And that 
writhing green pillar was curving and swaying as if it had no joints, or else were all joints. Her head was 
thrown far back and while her nose grew longer and longer, every other part of her face seemed to 
disappear, except her eyes. Huge flaming eyes they were now, without brows or lashes. All this takes time 
to write down; it happened so quickly that there was only just time to see it. Long before there was time to 
do anything, the change was complete, and the great serpent which the Witch had become, green as 
poison, thick as Jill's waist, had flung two or three coils of its loathsome body round the Prince's legs. 
Quick as lightning another great loop darted round, intending to pinion his sword-arm to his side. But the 
Prince was just in time. He raised his arms and got them clear: the living knot closed only round his chest 
- ready to crack his ribs like firewood when it drew tight. 
The Prince caught the creature's neck in his left hand, trying to squeeze it till it choked. This held its face 
(if you could call it a face) about five inches from his own. The forked tongue flickered horribly in and 
out, but could not reach him. With his right hand he drew back his sword for the strongest blow he could 
give. Meanwhile Scrubb and Puddleglum had drawn their weapons and rushed to his aid. All three blows 
fell at once: Scrubb's (which did not even pierce the scales and did no good) on the body of the snake 
below the Prince's hand, but the Prince's own blow and Puddleglum's both on its neck. Even that did not 
quite kill it, though it began to loosen its hold on Rilian's legs and chest. With repeated blows they hacked 
off its head. The horrible thing went on coiling and moving like a bit of wire long after it had died; and 
the floor, as you may imagine, was a nasty mess. 
The Prince, when he had breath, said, "Gentlemen, I thank you." Then the three conquerors stood staring 
at one another and panting, without another word, for a long time. Jill had very wisely sat down and was 
keeping quiet; she was saying to herself, "I do hope I don't faint or blub - or do anything idiotic." 
"My royal mother is avenged," said Rilian presently. "This is undoubtedly the same worm that I pursued 
in vain by the fountain in the forest of Narnia, so many years ago. All these years I have been the slave of 
my mother's slayer. Yet I am glad, gentlemen, that the foul Witch took to her serpent form at the last. It 

would not have suited well either with my heart or with my honour to have slain a woman. But look to the 
lady." He meant Jill. 
"I'm all right, thanks," said she. 
"Damsel," said the Prince, bowing to her. "You are of a high courage, and therefore, I doubt not, you 
come of a noble blood in your own world. But come, friends. Here is some wine left. Let us refresh 
ourselves and each pledge his fellows. After that, to our plans." 
"A jolly good idea, Sir," said Scrubb. 
ALL felt that they had earned what Scrubb called a "breather". The Witch had locked the door and told 
the Earthmen not to disturb her, so there was no danger of interruption for the present. Their first business 
was, of course, Puddleglum's burnt foot. A couple of clean shirts from the Prince's bedroom, torn into 
strips, and well greased on the inside with butter and salad oil off the supper table, made a fairly good 
dressing. When this had been applied, they all sat down and had a little refreshment, and discussed plans 
for escaping from the Underworld. 
Rilian explained that there were quite a lot of outlets by which one could get to the surface; he had been 
taken out through most of them at one time or another. But he had never gone out alone, only with the 
Witch; and he had always reached these outlets by going in a ship across the Sunless Sea. 
What the Earthmen would say if he went down to the harbour without the Witch, and with four strangers, 
and simply ordered a ship, no one could guess. But most likely they would ask awkward questions. On the 
other hand the new outlet, the one for the invasion of Overworld, was on this side of the sea, and only a 
few miles away. The Prince knew that it was nearly finished; only a few feet of earth divided the diggings 
from the outer air. 
It was even possible that it had now been quite finished. Perhaps the Witch had come back to tell him this 
and to start the attack. Even if it was not, they could probably dig themselves out by that route in a few 
hours - if they could only get there without being stopped, and if only they found the diggings unguarded. 

But those were the difficulties. 
"If you ask me -" began Puddleglum, when Scrubb interrupted. 
"I say," he asked, "what's that noise?" 
"I've been wondering that for some time!" said Jill. 
They had all, in fact, been hearing the noise but it had begun and increased so gradually that they did not 
know when they had first noticed it. For a time it had been only a vague disquiet like gentle winds, or 
traffic very far away. Then it swelled to a murmur like the sea. Then came rumblings and rushings. Now 
there seemed to be voices as well and also a steady roaring that was not voices. 
"By the Lion," said Prince Rilian, "it seems this silent land has found a tongue at last." He rose, walked to 
the window, and drew aside the curtains. The others crowded round him to look out. 
The very first thing they noticed was a great red glow. Its reflection made a red patch on the roof of the 
Underworld thousands of feet above them, so that they could see a rocky ceiling which had perhaps been 
hidden in darkness ever since the world was made. The glow itself came from the far side of the city so 
that many buildings, grim and great, stood up blackly against it. But it also cast its light down many 
streets that ran from it towards the castle. And in those streets something very strange was going on. The 
closely-packed, silent crowds of Earthmen had vanished. Instead, there were figures darting about by 
ones, or twos, or threes. They behaved like people who do not want to be seen: lurking in shadow behind 
buttresses or in doorways, and then moving quickly across the open into fresh places of hiding. But the 
strangest thing of all, to anyone who knew the gnomes, was the noise. Shouts and cries came from all 
directions. But from the harbour there came a low, rumbling roar which grew steadily louder and was 
already shaking the whole city. 
"What's happened to the Earthmen?" said Scrubb. "Is it them shouting?" 
"'Tis hardly possible," said the Prince. "I never heard one of the rascals so much as speak with a loud 
voice in all the weary years of my bondage. 

Some new devilry, I don't doubt." 
"And what is that red light over there?" asked Jill. "Is something on fire?" 
"If you ask me," said Puddleglum, "I should say that was the central fires of the Earth breaking out to 
make a new volcano. We'll be in the middle of it, I shouldn't wonder." 
"Look at that ship!" said Scrubb. "Why's it coming on so quickly? No one's rowing it." 
"Look, look!" said the Prince. "The ship is already far this side of the harbour - it is in the street. Look! 
All the ships are driving into the city! By my head, the sea's rising. The flood is upon us. Aslan be praised, 
this castle stands on high ground. But the water comes on grimly fast." 
"Oh, what can be happening?" cried Jill. "Fire and water and all those people dodging about the streets." 
"I'll tell you what it is," said Puddleglum. "That Witch has laid a train of magic spells so that whenever 
she was killed, at that same moment her whole kingdom would fall to pieces. She's the sort that wouldn't 
so much mind dying herself if she knew that the chap who killed her was going to be burned, or buried, or 
drowned five minutes later." 
"Hast hit it, friend wiggle," said the Prince. "When our swords hacked off the Witch's head, that stroke 
ended all her magic works, and now the Deep Lands are falling to pieces. We are looking on the end of 
Underworld." 
"That's it, Sir," said Puddleglum. "Unless it should happen to be the end of the whole world." 
"But are we just going to stay here and - wait?" gasped Jill. 
"Not by my counsel," said the Prince. "I would save my horse, Coalblack, and the Witch's Snowflake (a 

noble beast and worthy of a better mistress) which are both stabled in the courtyard. After that, let us 
make shift to get out to high ground and pray that we shall find an outlet. The horses can carry two each at 
need, and if we put them to it they may outstrip the flood." 
"Will your Highness not put on armour?" asked Puddleglum. "I don't like the look of those" - and he 
pointed down to the street. Everyone looked down. 
Dozens of creatures (and now that they were close, they obviously were Earthmen) were coming up from 
the direction of the harbour. But they were not moving like an aimless crowd. They behaved like modern 
soldiers in an attack, making rushes and taking cover, anxious not to be seen from the castle windows. 
"I dare not see the inside of that armour again," said the Prince. "I rode in it as in a movable dungeon, and 
it stinks of magic and slavery. But I will take the shield." 
He left the room and returned with a strange light in his eyes a moment later. 
"Look, friends," he said, holding out the shield towards them. "An hour ago it was black and without 
device; and now, this." The shield had turned bright as silver, and on it, redder than blood or cherries, was 
the figure of the Lion. 
"Doubtless," said the Prince, "this signifies that Aslan will be our good lord, whether he means us to live 
or die. And all's one, for that. Now, by my counsel, we shall all kneel and kiss his likeness, and then all 
shake hands one with another, as true friends that may shortly be parted. And then, let us descend into the 
city and take the adventure that is sent us." 
And they all did as the Prince had said. But when Scrubb shook hands with Jill, he said, "So long, Jill. 
Sorry I've been a funk and so ratty. I hope you get safe home," and Jill said, "So long, Eustace. And I'm 
sorry I've been such a pig." And this was the first time they had ever used Christian names, because one 
didn't do it at school. 
The Prince unlocked the door and they all went down the stairs: three of them with drawn swords, and 
Jill with drawn knife. The attendants had vanished and the great room at the foot of the Prince's stairs was 
empty. 

The grey, doleful lamps were still burning and by their light they had no difficulty in passing gallery after 
gallery and descending stairway after stairway. The noises from outside the castle were not so easily 
heard here as they had been in the room above. Inside the house all was still as death, and deserted. It was 
as they turned a corner into the great hall on the ground floor that they met their first Earthman - a fat, 
whitish creature with a very piglike face who was gobbling up all the remains of food on the tables. It 
squealed (the squeal also was very like a pig's) and darted under a bench, whisking its long tail out of 
Puddleglum's reach in the nick of time. Then it rushed away through the far door too quickly to be 
followed. 
From the hall they came out into the courtyard. Jill, who went to a riding school in the holidays, had just 
noticed the smell of a stable (a very nice, honest, homely smell it is to meet in a place like Underland) 
when Eustace said, "Great Scott! Look at that!" A magnificent rocket had risen from somewhere beyond 
the castle walls and broken into green stars. 
"Fireworks!" said Jill in a puzzled voice. 
"Yes," said Eustace, "but you can't imagine those Earth people letting them off for fun! It must be a 
signal." 
"And means no good to us, I'll be bound," said Puddleglum. 
"Friends," said the Prince, "when once a man is launched on such an adventure as this, he must bid 
farewell to hopes and fears, otherwise death or deliverance will both come too late to save his honour and 
his reason. 
Ho, my beauties" (he was now opening the stable door). "Hey cousins! Steady, Coalblack! Softly now, 
Snowflake! You are not forgotten." 
The horses were both frightened by the strange lights and the noises. Jill, who had been so cowardly 
about going through a black hole betweeen one cave and another, went in without fear between the 
stamping and snorting beasts, and she and the Prince had them saddled and bridled in a few minutes. Very 
fine they looked as they came out into the courtyard, tossing their heads. 

Jill mounted Snowflake, and Puddleglum got up behind her. Eustace got up behind the Prince on 
Coalblack. Then with a great echo of hoofs, they rode out of the main gateway into the street. 
"Not much danger of being burnt. That's the bright side of it," observed Puddleglum, pointing to their 
right. There, hardly a hundred yards away, lapping against the walls of the houses, was water. 
"Courage!" said the Prince. "The road there goes down steeply. That water has climbed only half up the 
greatest hill in the city. It might come so near in the first half-hour and come no nearer in the next two. 
My fear is more of that -" and he pointed with his sword to a great tall Earthman with boar's tusks, 
followed by six others of assorted shapes and sizes who had just dashed out of a side street and stepped 
into the shadow of the houses where no one could see them. 
The Prince led them, aiming always in the direction of the glowing red light but a little to the left of it. 
His plan was to get round the fire (if it was a fire) on to high ground, in hope that they might find their 
way to the new diggings. Unlike the other three, he seemed to be almost enjoying himself. He whistled as 
he rode, and sang snatches of an old song about Corin Thunder-fist of Archenland. The truth is, he was so 
glad at being free from his long enchantment that all dangers seemed a game in comparison. But the rest 
found it an eerie journey. 
Behind them was the sound of clashing and entangled ships, and the rumble of collapsing buildings. 
Overhead was the great patch of lurid light on the roof of the Underworld. Ahead was the mysterious 
glow, which did not seem to grow any bigger. From the same direction came a continual hubbub of 
shouts, screams, cat-calls, laughter, squeals, and bellowings; and fireworks of all sorts rose in the dark air. 
No one could guess what they meant. Nearer to them, the city was partly lit up by the red glow, and partly 
by the very different light of the dreary Gnome lamps. But there were many places where neither of these 
lights fell, and those places were jet-black. And in and out of those places the shapes of Earthmen were 
darting and slipping all the time, always with their eyes fixed on the travellers, always trying to keep out 
of sight themselves. There were big faces and little faces, huge eyes like fishes' eyes and little eyes like 
bears'. There were feathers and bristles, horns and tusks, noses like whipcord, and chins so long that they 
looked like beards. Every now and then a group of them would get too big or come too near. Then the 
Prince would brandish his sword and make a show of charging them. And the creatures, with all manner 
of hootings, squeakings, and cluckings, would dive away into the darkness. 
But when they had climbed many steep streets and were far away from the flood, and almost out of the 
town on the inland side, it began to be more serious. They were now close to the red glow and nearly on a 
level with it, though they still could not see what it really was. But by its light they could see their 
enemies more clearly. Hundreds - perhaps a few thousands - of gnomes were all moving towards it. But 
they were doing so in short rushes, and whenever they stopped, they turned and faced the travellers. 

"If your Highness asked me," said Puddleglum, "I'd say those fellows were meaning to cut us off in 
front." 
"That was my thought too, Puddleglum," said the Prince. "And we can never fight our way through so 
many. Hark you! Let us ride forth close by the edge of yonder house. And even as we reach it, do you slip 
off into its shadow. The Lady and I will go forward a few paces. Some of these devils will follow us, I 
doubt not; they are thick behind us. Do you, who have long arms, take one alive if you may, as it passes 
your ambush. We may get a true tale of it or learn what is their quarrel against us." 
"But won't the others all come rushing at us to rescue the one we catch," said Jill in a voice not so steady 
as she tried to make it. 
"Then, Madam," said the Prince, "you shall see us die fighting around you, and you must commend 
yourself to the Lion. Now, good Puddleglum." 
The Marsh-wiggle slipped off into the shadow as quickly as a cat. The others, for a sickening minute or 
so, went forward at a walk. Then suddenly from behind them there broke out a series of blood-curdling 
screams, mixed with the familiar voice of Puddleglum, saying, "Now then! Don't cry out before you're 
hurt, or you will be hurt, see? Anyone would think it was a pig being killed." 
"That was good hunting," exclaimed the Prince, immediately turning Coalblack and coming back to the 
corner of the house. "Eustace," he said, "of your courtesy, take Coalblack's head." Then he dismounted, 
and all three gazed in silence while Puddleglum pulled his catch out into the light. It was a most miserable 
little gnome, only about three feet long. It had a sort of ridge, like a cock's comb (only hard), on the top of 
its head, little pink eyes, and a mouth and chin so large and round that its face looked like that of a pigmy 
hippopotamus. If they had not been in such a tight place, they would have burst into laughter at the sight 
of it. 
"Now, Earthman," said the Prince, standing over it and holding his sword point very near the prisoner's 
neck, "speak, up, like an honest gnome, and you shall go free. Play the knave with us, and you are but a 
dead Earthman. 
Good Puddleglum, how can it speak while you hold its mouth tight shut?" 

"No, and it can't bite either," said Puddleglum. "If I had the silly soft hands that you humans have (saving 
your Highness's reverence) I'd have been all over blood by now. Yet even a Marsh-wiggle gets tired of 
being chewed.’ 
"Sirrah," said the Prince to the gnome, "one bite and you die. Let its mouth open, Puddleglum." 
"Oo-ee-ee," squealed the Earthman, "let me go, let me go. It isn't me. I didn't do it." 
"Didn't do what?" asked Puddleglum. 
"Whatever your Honours say I did do," answered the creature. 
"Tell me your name," said the Prince, "and what you Earthmen are all about today." 
"Oh please, your Honours, please, kind gentlemen," whimpered the gnome. 
"Promise you will not tell the Queen's grace anything I say." 
"The Queen's grace, as you call her," said the Prince sternly, "is dead. I killed her myself." 
"What!" cried the gnome, opening its ridiculous mouth wider and wider in astonishment. "Dead? The 
Witch dead? And by your Honour's hand?" It gave a huge sigh of relief and added, "Why then your 
Honour is a friend!" 
The Prince withdrew his sword an inch or so. Puddleglum let the creature sit up. It looked round on the 
four travellers with its twinkling, red eyes, chuckled once or twice, and began. 

"MY name is Golg," said the gnome. "And I'll tell your Honours all I know. 
About an hour ago we were all going about our work - her work, I should say - sad and silent, same as 
we've done any other day for years and years. 
Then there came a great crash and bang. As soon as they heard it, everyone says to himself, I haven't had 
a song or a dance or let off a squib for a long time; why's that? And everyone thinks to himself, Why, I 
must have been enchanted. And then everyone says to himself, I'm blessed if I know why I'm carrying this 
load, and I'm not going to carry it any farther: that's that. And down we all throw our sacks and bundles 
and tools. Then everyone turns and sees the great red glow over yonder. And everyone says to himself, 
What's that? and everyone answers himself and says, There's a crack or chasm split open and a nice warm 
glow coming up through it from the Really Deep Land, a thousand fathom under us." 
"Great Scott," exclaimed Eustace, "are there other lands still lower down?" 
"Oh yes, your Honour," said Golg. "Lovely places; what we call the Land of Bism. This country where 
we are now, the Witch's country, is what we call the Shallow Lands. It's a good deal too near the surface 
to suit us. Ugh! You might almost as well be living outside, on the surface itself. You see, we're all poor 
gnomes from Bism whom the Witch has called up here by magic to work for her. But we'd forgotten all 
about it till that crash came and the spell broke. We didn't know who we were or where we belonged. We 
couldn't do anything, or think anything, except what she put into our heads. And it was glum and gloomy 
things she put there all those years. 
I've nearly forgotten how to make a joke or dance a jig. But the moment the bang came and the chasm 
opened and the sea began rising, it all came back. 
And of course we all set off as quick as we could to get down the crack and home to our own place. And 
you can see them over there all letting off rockets and standing on their heads for joy. And I'll be very 
obliged to your Honours if you'll soon let me go and join in." 

"I think this is simply splendid," said Jill. "I'm so glad we freed the gnomes as well as ourselves when we 
cut off the Witch's head! And I'm so glad they aren't really horrid and gloomy any more than the Prince 
really was well, what he seemed like." 
"That's all very well, Pole," said Puddleglum cautiously. "But those gnomes didn't look to me like chaps 
who were just running away. It looked more like military formations, if you ask me. Do you look me in 
the face, Mr Golg, and tell me you weren't preparing for battle?" 
"Of course we were, your Honour," said Golg. "You see, we didn't know the Witch was dead. We 
thought she'd be watching from the castle. We were trying to slip away without being seen. And then 
when you three came out with swords and horses, of course everyone says to himself, Here it comes: not 
knowing that his Honour wasn't on the Witch's side. And we were determined to fight like anything rather 
than give up the hope of going back to Bism." 
"I'll be sworn 'tis an honest gnome," said the Prince. "Let go of it, friend Puddleglum. As for me, good 
Golg, I have been enchanted like you and your fellows, and have but newly remembered myself. And 
now, one question more. Do you know the way to those new diggings, by which the sorceress meant to 
lead out an army against Overland?" 
"Ee-ee-ee!" squeaked Golg. "Yes, I know that terrible road. I will show you where it begins. But it is no 
manner of use your Honour asking me to go with you on it. I'll die rather." 
"Why?" asked Eustace anxiously. "What's so dreadful about it?" 
"Too near the top, the outside," said Golg, shuddering. "That was the worst thing the Witch did to us. We 
were going to be led out into the open - on to the outside of the world. They say there's no roof at all 
there; only a horrible great emptiness called the sky. And the diggings have gone so far that a few strokes 
of the pick would bring you out to it. I wouldn't dare go near them." 
"Hurrah! Now you're talking!" cried Eustace, and Jill said, "But it's not horrid at all up there. We like it. 
We live there." 
"I know you Overlanders live there," said Golg. "But I thought it was because you couldn't find your way 
down inside. You can't really like it - crawling about like flies on the top of the world!" 

"What about showing us the road at once?" said Puddleglum. 
"In a good hour," cried the Prince. The whole party set out. The Prince remounted his charger, 
Puddleglum climbed up behind Jill, and Golg led the way. As he went, he kept shouting out the good 
news that the Witch was dead and that the four Overlanders were not dangerous. And those who heard 
him shouted it on to others, so that in a few minutes the whole of Underland was ringing with shouts and 
cheers, and gnomes by hundreds and thousands, leaping, turning cart-wheels, standing on their heads, 
playing leap-frog, and letting off huge crackers, came pressing round Coalblack and Snowflake. 
And the Prince had to tell the story of his own enchantment and deliverance at least ten times. 
In this way they came to the edge of the chasm. It was about a thousand feet long and perhaps two 
hundred wide. They dismounted from their horses and came to the edge, and looked down into it. A 
strong heat smote up into their faces, mixed with a smell which was quite unlike any they had ever 
smelled. It was rich, sharp, exciting, and made you sneeze. The depth of the chasm was so bright that at 
first it dazzled their eyes and they could see nothing. When they got used to it they thought they could 
make out a river of fire, and, on the banks of that river, what seemed to be fields and groves of an 
unbearable, hot brilliance - though they were dim compared with the river. There were blues, reds, greens, 
and whites all jumbled together: a very good stained-glass window with the tropical sun staring straight 
through it at midday might have something the same effect. Down the rugged sides of the chasm, looking 
black like flies against all that fiery light, hundreds of Earthmen were climbing. 
"Your honours," said Golg (and when they turned to look at him they could see nothing but blackness for 
a few minutes, their eyes were so dazzled). 
"Your honours, why don't you come down to Bism? You'd be happier there than in that cold, 
unprotected, naked country out on top. Or at least come down for a short visit." 
Jill took it for granted that none of the others would listen to such an idea for a moment. To her horror 
she heard the Prince saying: 
"Truly, friend Golg, I have half a mind to come down with you. For this is a marvellous adventure, and it 
may be no mortal man has ever looked into Bism before or will ever have the chance again. And I know 

not how, as the years pass, I shall bear to remember that it was once in my power to have probed the 
uttermost pit of Earth and that I forbore. But could a man live there? You do not swim in the fire-river 
itself?" 
"Oh no, your Honour. Not we. It's only salamanders live in the fire itself." 
"What kind of beast is your salamander?" asked the Prince. 
"It is hard to tell their kind, your Honour," said Golg. "For they are too white-hot to look at. But they are 
most like small dragons. They speak to us out of the fire. They are wonderfully clever with their tongues: 
very witty and eloquent." 
Jill glanced hastily at Eustace. She had felt sure that he would like the idea of sliding down that chasm 
even less than she did. Her heart sank as she saw that his face was quite changed. He looked much more 
like the Prince than like the old Scrubb at Experiment House. For all his adventures, and the days when he 
had sailed with King Caspian, were coming back to him. 
"Your Highness," he said. "If my old friend Reepicheep the Mouse were here, he would say we could not 
now refuse the adventures of Bism without a great impeachment to our honour." 
"Down there," said Golg, "I could show you real gold, real silver, real diamonds." 
"Bosh!" said Jill rudely. "As if we didn't know that we're below the deepest mines even here." 
"Yes," said Golg. "I have heard of those little scratches in the crust that you Topdwellers call mines. But 
that's where you get dead gold, dead silver, dead gems. Down in Bism we have them alive and growing. 
There I'll pick you bunches of rubies that you can eat and squeeze you a cup full of diamond-juice. You 
won't care much about fingering the cold, dead treasures of your shallow mines after you have tasted the 
live ones of Bism." 
"My father went to the world's end," said Rilian thoughtfully. "It would be a marvellous thing if his son 
went to the bottom of the world." 

"If your Highness wants to see your father while he's still alive, which I think he'd prefer," said 
Puddleglum, "it's about time we were getting on to that road to the diggings." 
"And I won't go down that hole, whatever anyone says," added Jill. 
"Why, if your Honours are really set to go back to Overworld," said Golg, "there is one bit of the road 
that's rather lower than this. And perhaps, if that flood's still rising -" 
"Oh, do, do, do come on!" begged Jill. 
"I fear it must be so," said the Prince with a deep sigh. "But I have left half of my heart in the land of 
Bism." 
"Please!" begged Jill. 
"Where is the road?" asked Puddleglum. 
"There are lamps all the way," said Golg. "Your Honour can see the beginning of the road on the far side 
of the chasm." 
"How long will the lamps burn for?" asked Puddleglum. 
At that moment a hissing, scorching voice like the voice of Fire itself (they wondered afterwards if it 
could have been a salamander's) came whistling up out of the very depths of Bism. 
"Quick! Quick! Quick! To the cliffs, to the cliffs, to the cliffs!" it said. "The rift closes. It closes. It 
closes. Quick! Quick!" And at the same time, with ear-shattering cracks and creaks, the rocks moved. 

Already, while they looked, the chasm was narrower. From every side belated gnomes were rushing into 
it. They would not wait to climb down the rocks. They flung themselves headlong and, either because so 
strong a blast of hot air was beating up from the bottom, or for some other reason, they could be seen 
floating downwards like leaves. Thicker and thicker they floated, till their blackness almost blotted out the 
fiery river and the groves of live gems. "Good-bye to your Honours. I'm off," shouted Golg, and dived. 
Only a few were left to follow him. The chasm was now no broader than a stream. 
Now it was narrow as the slit in a pillarbox. Now it was only an intensely bright thread. Then, with a 
shock like a thousand goods trains crashing into a thousand pairs of buffers, the lips of rock closed. The 
hot, maddening smell vanished. The travellers were alone in an Underworld which now looked far blacker 
than before. Pale, dim, and dreary, the lamps marked the direction of the road. 
"Now," said Puddleglum, "it's ten to one we've already stayed too long, but we may as well make a try. 
Those lamps will give out in five minutes, I shouldn't wonder." 
They urged the horses to a canter and thundered along the dusky road in fine style. But almost at once it 
began going downhill. They would have thought Golg had sent them the wrong way if they had not seen, 
on the other side of the valley, the lamps going on and upwards as far as the eye could reach. But at the 
bottom of the valley the lamps shone on moving water. 
"Haste," cried the Prince. They galloped down the slope. It would have been nasty enough at the bottom 
even five minutes later for the tide was running up the valley like a mill-race, and if it had come to 
swimming, the horses could hardly have won over. But it was still only a foot or two deep, and though it 
swished terribly round the horses' legs, they reached the far side in safety. 
Then began the slow, weary march uphill with nothing ahead to look at but the pale lamps which went up 
and up as far as the eye could reach. When they looked back they could see the water spreading. All the 
hills of Underland were now islands, and it was only on those islands that the lamps remained. Every 
moment some distant light vanished. Soon there would be total darkness everywhere except on the road 
they were following; and even on the lower part of it behind them, though no lamps had yet gone out, the 
lamplight shone on water. 
Although they had good reason for hurrying, the horses could not go on for ever without a rest. They 
halted: and in silence they could hear the lapping of water. 
"I wonder is what's his name - Father Time - flooded out now," said Jill. 

"And all those queer sleeping animals." 
"I don't think we're as high as that," said Eustace. "Don't you remember how we had to go downhill to 
reach the sunless sea? I shouldn't think the water has reached Father Time's cave yet." 
"That's as may be," said Puddleglum. "I'm more interested in the lamps on this road. Look a bit sickly, 
don't they?" 
"They always did," said Jill. 
"Aye," said Puddleglum. "But they're greener now." 
"You don't mean to say you think they're going out?" cried Eustace. 
"Well, however they work, you can't expect them to last for ever, you know," replied the Marsh-wiggle. 
"But don't let your spirits down, Scrubb. 
I've got my eye on the water too, and I don't think it's rising so fast as it did." 
"Small comfort, friend," said the Prince. "If we cannot find our way out. I cry you mercy, all. I am to 
blame for my pride and fantasy which delayed us by the mouth of the land of Bism. Now, let us ride on." 
During the hour or so that followed Jill sometimes thought that Puddleglum was right about the lamps, 
and sometimes thought it was only her imagination. Meanwhile the land was changing. The roof of 
Underland was so near that even by that dull light they could now see it quite distinctly. 
And the great, rugged walls of Underland could be seen drawing closer on each side. The road, in fact, 

was leading them up into a steep tunnel. They began to pass picks and shovels and barrows and other 
signs that the diggers had recently been at work. If only one could be sure of getting out, all this was very 
cheering. But the thought of going on into a hole that would get narrower and narrower, and harder to turn 
back in, was very unpleasant. 
At last the roof was so low that Puddleglum and the Prince knocked their heads against it. The party 
dismounted and led the horses. The road was uneven here and one had to pick one's steps with some care. 
That was how Jill noticed the growing darkness. There was no doubt about it now. The faces of the others 
looked strange and ghastly in the green glow. Then all at once (she couldn't help it) Jill gave a little 
scream. One light, the next one ahead, went out altogether. The one behind them did the same. Then they 
were in absolute darkness. 
"Courage, friends," came Prince Rilian's voice. "Whether we live or die Aslan will be our good lord." 
"That's right, Sir," said Puddleglum's voice. "And you must always remember there's one good thing 
about being trapped down here: it'll save funeral expenses." 
Jill held her tongue. (If you don't want other people to know how frightened you are, this is always a wise 
thing to do; it's your voice that gives you away.) 
"We might as well go on as stand here," said Eustace; and when she heard the tremble in his voice, Jill 
knew how wise she'd been not to trust her own. 
Puddleglum and Eustace went first with their arms stretched out in front of them, for fear of blundering 
into anything; Jill and the Prince followed, leading the horses. 
"I say," came Eustace's voice much later, "are my eyes going queer or is there a patch of light up there?" 
Before anyone could answer him, Puddleglum called out: "Stop. I'm up against a dead end. And it's earth, 
not rock. What were you saying, Scrubb?" 
"By the Lion," said the Prince, "Eustace is right. There is a sort of -" 

"But it's not daylight," said Jill. "It's only a cold blue sort of light." 
"Better than nothing, though," said Eustace. "Can we get up to it?" 
"It's not right overhead," said Puddleglum. "It's above us, but it's in this wall that I've run into. How 
would it be, Pole, if you got on my shoulders and saw whether you could get up to it?" 
THE patch of light did not show up anything down in the darkness where they were standing. The others 
could only hear, not see, Jill's efforts to get on to the Marsh-wiggle's back. That is, they heard him saying, 
"You needn't put your finger in my eye," and, "Nor your foot in my mouth either," and, "That's more like 
it," and, "Now, I'll hold on to your legs. That'll leave your arms free to steady yourself against the earth." 
Then they looked up and soon they saw the black shape of Jill's head against the patch of light. 
"Well?" they all shouted up anxiously. 
"It's a hole," called Jill's voice. "I could get through it if I was a little bit higher." 
"What do you see through it?" asked Eustace. 
"Nothing much yet," said Jill. "I say, Puddleglum, let go my legs so that I can stand on your shoulders 
instead of sitting on them. I can steady myself all right against the edge." 
They could hear her moving and then much more of her came into sight against the greyness of the 

opening; in fact all of her down to the waist. 
"I say -" began Jill, but suddenly broke off with a cry: not a sharp cry. 
It sounded more as if her mouth had been muffled up or had something pushed into it. After that she 
found her voice and seemed to be shouting out as loud as she could, but they couldn't hear the words. Two 
things then happened at the same moment. The patch of light was completely blocked up for a second or 
so; and they heard both a scuffling, struggling sound and the voice of the Marsh-wiggle gasping: "Quick! 
Help! Hold on to her legs. 
Someone's pulling her. There! No, here. Too late!" 
The opening, and the cold light which filled it, were now perfectly clear again. Jill had vanished. 
"Jill! Jill!" they shouted frantically, but there was no answer. 
"Why the dickens couldn't you have held her feet?" said Eustace. 
"I don't know, Scrubb," groaned Puddleglum. "Born to be a misfit, I shouldn't wonder. Fated. Fated to be 
Pole's death, just as I was fated to eat Talking Stag at Harfang. Not that it isn't my own fault as well, of 
course." 
"This is the greatest shame and sorrow that could have fallen on us," said the Prince. "We have sent a 
brave lady into the hands of enemies and stayed behind in safety." 
"Don't paint it too black, Sir," said Puddleglum. "We're not very safe except for death by starvation in 
this hole." 
"I wonder am I small enough to get through where Jill did?" said Eustace. 

What had really happened to Jill was this. As soon as she got her head out of the hole she found that she 
was looking down as if from an upstairs window, not up as if through a trap-door. She had been so long in 
the dark that her eyes couldn't at first take in what they were seeing: except that she was not looking at the 
daylit, sunny world which she so wanted to see. 
The air seemed to be deadly cold, and the light was pale and blue. There was also a good deal of noise 
going on and a lot of white objects flying about in the air. It was at that moment that she had shouted 
down to Puddleglum to let her stand up on his shoulders. 
When she had done this, she could see and hear a good deal better. The noises she had been hearing 
turned out to be of two kinds: the rhythmical thump of several feet, and the music of four fiddles, three 
flutes, and a drum. She also got her own position clear. She was looking out of a hole in a steep bank 
which sloped down and reached the level about fourteen feet below her. Everything was very white. A lot 
of people were moving about. 
Then she gasped! The people were trim little Fauns, and Dryads with leafcrowned hair floating behind 
them. For a second they looked as if they were moving anyhow; then she saw that they were really doing 
a dance - a dance with so many complicated steps and figures that it took you some time to understand it. 
Then it came over her like a thunderclap that the pale, blue light was really moonlight, and the white stuff 
on the ground was really snow. And of course! There were the stars staring in a black frosty sky overhead. 
And the tall black things behind the dancers were trees. They had not only got out into the upper world at 
last, but had come out in the heart of Narnia. Jill felt she could have fainted with delight; and the music - 
the wild music, intensely sweet and yet just the least bit eerie too, and full of good magic as the Witch's 
thrumming had been full of bad magic - made her feel it all the more. 
All this takes a long time to tell, but of course it took a very short time to see. Jill turned almost at once to 
shout down to the others, "I say! It's all right. We're out, and we're home." But the reason she never got 
further than "I say" was this. Circling round and round the dancers was a ring of Dwarfs, all dressed in 
their finest clothes; mostly scarlet with fur-lined hoods and golden tassels and big furry top-boots. As they 
circled round they were all diligently throwing snowballs. (Those were the white things that Jill had seen 
flying through the air.) They weren't throwing them at the dancers as silly boys might have been doing in 
England. They were throwing them through the dance in such perfect time with the music and with such 
perfect aim that if all the dancers were in exactly the right places at exactly the right moments, no one 
would be hit. This is called the Great Snow Dance and it is done every year in Narnia on the first moonlit 
night when there is snow on the ground. Of course it is a kind of game as well as a dance, because every 
now and then some dancer will be the least little bit wrong and get a snowball in the face, and then 
everyone laughs. But a good team of dancers, Dwarfs, and musicians will keep it up for hours without a 
single hit. On fine nights when the cold and the drum-taps, and the hooting of the owls, and the 
moonlight, have got into their wild, woodland blood and made it even wilder, they will dance till 
daybreak. I wish you could see it for yourselves. 

What had stopped Jill when she got as far as the say of "I say" was of course simply a fine big snowball 
that came sailing through the dance from a Dwarf on the far side and got her fair and square in the mouth. 
She didn't in the least mind; twenty snowballs would not have damped her spirits at that moment. But 
however happy you are feeling, you can't talk with your mouth full of snow. And when, after considerable 
spluttering, she could speak again, she quite forgot in her excitement that the others, down in the dark, 
behind her, still didn't know the good news. She simply leaned as far out of the hole as she could, and 
yelled to the dancers. 
"Help! Help! We're buried in the hill. Come and dig us out." 
The Narnians, who had not even noticed the little hole in the hillside, were of course very surprised, and 
looked about in several wrong directions before they found out where the voice was coming from. But 
when they caught sight of Jill they all came running towards her, and as many as could scrambled up the 
bank, and a dozen or more hands were stretched up to help her. And Jill caught hold of them and thus got 
out of the hole and came slithering down the bank head first, and then picked herself up and said: 
"Oh, do go and dig the others out. There are three others, besides the horses. And one of them is Prince 
Rilian." 
She was already in the middle of a crowd when she said this, for besides the dancers all sorts of people 
who had been watching the dance, and whom she had not seen at first, came running up. Squirrels came 
out of the trees in showers, and so did Owls. Hedgehogs came waddling as fast as their short legs would 
carry them. Bears and Badgers followed at a slower pace. A great Panther, twitching its tail in excitement, 
was the last to join the party. 
But as soon as they understood what Jill was saying, they all became active. "Pick and shovel, boys, pick 
and shovel. Off for our tools!" said the Dwarfs, and dashed away into the woods at top speed. "Wake up 
some Moles, they're the chaps for digging. They're quite as good as Dwarfs," said a voice. "What was that 
she said about Prince Rilian?" said another. 
"Hush!" said the Panther. "The poor child's crazed, and no wonder after being lost inside the hill. She 
doesn't know what she's saying." "That's right," said an old Bear. "Why, she said Prince Rilian was a 
horse!" "No, she didn't," said a Squirrel, very pert. "Yes, she did," said another Squirrel, even perter. 

"It's quite t-t-t-true. D-d-don't be so silly," said Jill. She spoke like that because her teeth were now 
chattering with the cold. 
Immediately one of the Dryads flung round her a furry cloak which some Dwarf had dropped when he 
rushed to fetch his mining tools, and an obliging Faun trotted off among the trees to a place where Jill 
could see firelight in the mouth of a cave, to get her a hot drink. But before it came, all the Dwarfs 
reappeared with spades and pick-axes and charged at the hillside. 
Then Jill heard cries of "Hi! What are you doing? Put that sword down," and "Now, young 'un: none of 
that," and, "He's a vicious one, now, isn't he?" Jill hurried to the spot and didn't know whether to laugh or 
cry when she saw Eustace's face, very pale and dirty, projecting from the blackness of the hole, and 
Eustace's right hand brandishing a sword with which he made lunges at anyone who came near him. 
For of course Eustace had been having a very different time from Jill during the last few minutes. He had 
heard Jill cry out and seen her disappear into the unknown. Like the Prince and Puddleglum, he thought 
that some enemies had caught her. And from down below he didn't see that the pale, blueish light was 
moonlight. He thought the hole would lead only into some other cave, lit by some ghostly 
phosphorescence and filled with goodness-knows-what evil creatures of the Underworld. So that when he 
had persuaded Puddleglum to give him a back, and drawn his sword, and poked out his head, he had 
really been doing a very brave thing. The others would have done it first if they could, but the hole was 
too small for them to climb through. Eustace was a little bigger, and a lot clumsier, than Jill, so that when 
he looked out he bumped his head against the top of the hole and brought a small avalanche of snow 
down on his face. And so, when he could see again, and saw dozens of figures coming at him as hard as 
they could run, it is not surprising that he tried to ward them off. 
"Stop, Eustace, stop," cried Jill. "They're all friends. Can't you see? We've come up in Narnia. 
Everything's all right." 
Then Eustace did see, and apologized to the Dwarfs (and the Dwarfs said not to mention it), and dozens 
of thick, hairy, dwarfish hands helped him out just as they had helped Jill out a few minutes before. Then 
Jill scrambled up the bank and put her head in at the dark opening and shouted the good news in to the 
prisoners. As she turned away she heard Puddleglum mutter. 
"Ah, poor Pole. It's been too much for her, this last bit. Turned her head, I shouldn't wonder. She's 
beginning to see things." 

Jill rejoined Eustace and they shook one another by both hands and took in great deep breaths of the free 
midnight air. And a warm cloak was brought for Eustace and hot drinks, for both. While they were 
sipping it, the Dwarfs had already got all the snow and all the sods off a large strip of the hillside round 
the original hole, and the pickaxes and spades were now going as merrily as the feet of Fauns and Dryads 
had been going in the dance ten minutes before. Only ten minutes! Yet already it felt to Jill and Eustace as 
if all their dangers in the dark and heat and general smotheriness of the earth must have been only a 
dream. Out here, in the cold, with the moon and the huge stars overhead (Narnian stars are nearer than 
stars in our world) and with kind, merry faces all round them, one couldn't quite believe in Underland. 
Before they had finished their hot drinks, a dozen or so Moles, newly waked and still very sleepy, and not 
well pleased, had arrived. But as soon as they understood what it was all about, they joined in with a will. 
Even the Fauns made themselves useful by carting away the earth in little barrows, and the Squirrels 
danced and leaped to and fro in great excitement, though Jill never found out exactly what they thought 
they were doing. The Bears and Owls contented themselves with giving advice, and kept on asking the 
children if they wouldn't like to come into the cave (that was where Jill had seen the firelight) and get 
warm and have supper. But the children couldn't bear to go without seeing their friends set free. 
No one in our world can work at a job of that sort as Dwarfs and Talking Moles work in Narnia; but then, 
of course, Moles and Dwarfs don't look on it as work. They like digging. It was therefore not really long 
before they had opened a great black chasm in the hillside. And out from the blackness into the moonlight 
- this would have been rather dreadful if one hadn't known who they were came, first, the long, leggy, 
steeple-hatted figure of the Marsh-wiggle, and then, leading two great horses, Rilian the Prince himself. 
As Puddleglum appeared shouts broke out on every side: "Why, it's a Wiggle - why, it's old Puddleglum - 
old Puddleglum from the Eastern Marshes - what ever have you been doing, Puddleglum? - there've been 
search-parties out for you - the Lord Trumpkin has been putting up notices there's a reward offered!" But 
all this died away, all in one moment, into dead silence, as quickly as the noise dies away in a rowdy 
dormitory if the Headmaster opens the door. For now they saw the Prince. 
No one doubted for a moment who he was. There were plenty of Beasts and Dryads and Dwarfs and 
Fauns who remembered him from the days before his enchanting. There were some old ones who could 
just remember how his father, King Caspian, had looked when he was a young man, and saw the likeness. 
But I think they would have known him anyway. Pale though he was from long imprisonment in the Deep 
Lands, dressed in black, dusty, dishevelled, and weary, there was something in his face and air which no 
one could mistake. That look is in the face of all true kings of Narnia, who rule by the will of Aslan and 
sit at Cair Paravel on the throne of Peter the High King. 
Instantly every head was bared and every knee was bent; a moment later such cheering and shouting, 
such jumps and reels of joy, such hand-shakings and kissings and embracings of everybody by everybody 

else broke out that the tears came into Jill's eyes. Their quest had been worth all the pains it cost. 
"Please it your Highness," said the oldest of the Dwarfs, "there is some attempt at a supper in the cave 
yonder, prepared against the ending of the snow-dance -" 
"With a good will, Father," said the Prince. "For never had any Prince, Knight, Gentleman, or Bear so 
good a stomach to his victuals as we four wanderers have tonight." 
The whole crowd began to move away through the trees towards the cave. Jill heard Puddleglum saying 
to those who pressed round him. "No, no, my story can wait. 
Nothing worth talking about has happened to me. I want to hear the news. 
Don't try breaking it to me gently, for I'd rather have it all at once. Has the King been shipwrecked? Any 
forest fires? No wars on the Calormen border? Or a few dragons, I shouldn't wonder?" And all the 
creatures laughed aloud and said, "Isn't that just like a Marshwiggle?" 
The two children were nearly dropping with tiredness and hunger, but the warmth of the cave, and the 
very sight of it, with the firelight dancing on the walls and dressers and cups and saucers and plates and 
on the smooth stone floor, just as it does in a farmhouse kitchen, revived them a little. 
All the same they went fast asleep while supper was being got ready. And while they slept Prince Rilian 
was talking over the whole adventure with the older and wiser Beasts and Dwarfs. And now they all saw 
what it meant; how a wicked Witch (doubtless the same kind as that White Witch who had brought the 
Great Winter on Narnia long ago) had contrived the whole thing, first killing Rilian's mother and 
enchanting Rilian himself. And they saw how she had dug right under Narnia and was going to break out 
and rule it through Rilian: and how he had never dreamed that the country of which she would make him 
king (king in name, but really her slave) was his own country. And from the children's part of the story 
they saw how she was in league and friendship with the dangerous giants of Harfang. "And the lesson of 
it all is, your Highness," said the oldest Dwarf, "that those Northern Witches always mean the same thing, 
but in every age they have a different plan for getting it." 

WHEN Jill woke next morning and found herself in a cave, she thought for one horrid moment that she 
was back in the Underworld. But when she noticed that she was lying on a bed of heather with a furry 
mantle over her, and saw a cheery fire crackling (as if newly lit) on a stone hearth and, farther off, 
morning sunlight coming in through the cave's mouth, she remembered all the happy truth. They had had 
a delightful supper, all crowded into that cave, in spite of being so sleepy before it was properly over. She 
had a vague impression of Dwarfs crowding round the fire with frying-pans rather bigger than themselves, 
and the hissing, and delicious smell of sausages, and more, and more, and more sausages. And not 
wretched sausages half full of bread and soya bean either, but real meaty, spicy ones, fat and piping hot 
and burst and just the tiniest bit burnt. And great mugs of frothy chocolate, and roast potatoes and roast 
chestnuts, and baked apples with raisins stuck in where the cores had been, and then ices just to freshen 
you up after all the hot things. 
Jill sat up and looked around. Puddleglum and Eustace were lying not far away, both fast asleep. 
"Hi, you two!" shouted Jill in a loud voice. "Aren't you ever going to get up?" 
"Shoo, shoo!" said a sleepy voice somewhere above her. "Time to be settling down. Have a good snooze, 
do, do. Don't make a to-do. Tu-whoo!" 
"Why, I do believe," said Jill, glancing up at a white bundle of fluffy feathers which was perched on top 
of a grandfather clock in one corner of the cave, "I do believe it's Glimfeather!" 
"True, true," whirred the Owl, lifting its head out from under its wing and opening one eye. "I came up 
with a message for the Prince at about two. The squirrels brought us the good news. Message for the 
Prince. He's gone. 
You're to follow too. Good-day -" and the head disappeared again. 
As there seemed no further hope of getting any information from the Owl, Jill got up and began looking 
round for any chance of a wash and some breakfast. But almost at once a little Faun came trotting into the 
cave with a sharp click-clack of his goaty hoofs on the stone floor. 

"Ah! You've woken up at last, Daughter of Eve," he said. "Perhaps you'd better wake the Son of Adam. 
You've got to be off in a few minutes and two Centaurs have very kindly offered to let you ride on their 
backs down to Cair Paravel." He added in a lower voice. "Of course, you realize it is a most special and 
unheard-of honour to be allowed to ride a Centaur. I don't know that I ever heard of anyone doing it 
before. It wouldn't do to keep them waiting." 
"Where's the Prince?" was the first question of Eustace and Puddleglum as soon as they had been 
wakened. 
"He's gone down to meet the King, his father, at Cair Paravel," answered the Faun, whose name was 
Orruns. "His Majesty's ship is expected in harbour any moment. It seems that the King met Aslan - I don't 
know whether it was in a vision or face to face - before he had sailed far, and Aslan turned him back and 
told him he would find his long-lost son awaiting him when he reached Narnia." 
Eustace was now up and he and Jill set about helping Orruns to get the breakfast. Puddleglum was told to 
stay in bed. A Centaur called Cloudbirth, a famous healer, or (as Orruns called it) a 'leech', was coming to 
see to his burnt foot. 
"Ah!" said Puddleglum in a tone almost of contentment, "he'll want to have the leg off at the knee, I 
shouldn't wonder. You see if he doesn't." But he was quite glad to stay in bed. 
Breakfast was scrambled eggs and toast and Eustace tackled it just as if he had not had a very large 
supper in the middle of the night. 
"I say, Son of Adam," said the Faun, looking with a certain awe at Eustace's mouthfuls. "There's no need 
to hurry quite so dreadfully as that. 
I don't think the Centaurs have quite finished their breakfasts yet." 
"Then they must have got up very late," said Eustace. "I bet it's after ten o'clock." 

"Oh no," said Orruns. "They got up before it was light." 
"Then they must have waited the dickens of a time for breakfast," said Eustace. 
"No, they didn't," said Orruns. "They began eating the minute they awoke." 
"Golly!" said Eustace. "Do they eat a very big breakfast?" 
"Why, Son of Adam, don't you understand? A Centaur has a man-stomach and a horse-stomach. And of 
course both want breakfast. So first of all he has porridge and pavenders and kidneys and bacon and 
omelette and cold ham and toast and marmalade and coffee and beer. And after that he attends to the 
horse part of himself by grazing for an hour or so and finishing up with a hot mash, some oats, and a bag 
of sugar. That's why it's such a serious thing to ask a Centaur to stay for the week-end. A very serious 
thing indeed." 
At that moment there was a sound of horse-hoofs tapping on rock from the mouth of the cave, and the 
children looked up. The two Centaurs, one with a black and one with a golden beard flowing over their 
magnificent bare chests, stood waiting for them, bending their heads a little so as to look into the cave. 
Then the children became very polite and finished their breakfast very quickly. No one thinks a Centaur 
funny when he sees it. They are solemn, majestic people, full of ancient wisdom which they learn from 
the stars, not easily made either merry or angry; but their anger is terrible as a tidal wave when it comes. 
"Good-bye, dear Puddleglum," said Jill, going over to the Marsh-wiggle's bed. "I'm sorry we called you a 
wet blanket." 
"So'm I," said Eustace. "You've been the best friend in the world." 
"And I do hope we'll meet again," added Jill. 
"Not much chance of that, I should say," replied Puddleglum. "1 don't reckon I'm very likely to see my 
old wigwam again either. And that Prince - he's a nice chap - but do you think he's very strong? 
Constitution ruined with living underground, I shouldn't wonder. Looks the sort that might go off any 

day." 
"Puddleglum!" said Jill. "You're a regular old humbug. You sound as doleful as a funeral and I believe 
you're perfectly happy. And you talk as if you were afraid of everything, when you're really as brave as-as 
a lion." 
"Now, speaking of funerals," began Puddleglum, but Jill, who heard the Centaurs tapping with their 
hoofs behind her, surprised him very much by flinging her arms round his thin neck and kissing his 
muddy-looking face, while Eustace wrung his hand. Then they both rushed away to the Centaurs, and the 
Marsh-wiggle, sinking back on his bed, remarked to himself, "Well, I wouldn't have dreamt of her doing 
that. Even though I am a good-looking chap." 
To ride on a Centaur is, no doubt, a great honour (and except Jill and Eustace there is probably no one 
alive in the world today who has had it) but it is very uncomfortable. For no one who valued his life 
would suggest putting a saddle on a Centaur, and riding bare-back is no fun; especially if, like Eustace, 
you have never learned to ride at all. The Centaurs were very polite in a grave, gracious, grown-up kind of 
way, and as they cantered through the Narnian woods they spoke, without turning their heads, telling the 
children about the properties of herbs and roots, the influences of the planets, the nine names of Aslan 
with their meanings, and things of that sort. But however sore and jolted the two humans were, they 
would now give anything to have that journey over again: to see those glades and slopes sparkling with 
last night's snow, to be met by rabbits and squirrels and birds that wished you good morning, to breathe 
again the air of Narnia and hear the voices of the Narnian trees. 
They came down to the river, flowing bright and blue in winter sunshine, far below the last bridge (which 
is at the snug, red-roofed little town of Beruna) and were ferried across in a flat barge by the ferryman; or 
rather, by the ferry-wiggle, for it is Marsh-wiggles who do most of the watery and fishy kinds of work in 
Narnia. And when they had crossed they rode along the south bank of the river and presently came to Cair 
Paravel itself. And at the very moment of their arrival they saw that same bright ship which they had seen 
when they first set foot in Narnia, gliding up the river like a huge bird. All the court were once more 
assembled on the green between the castle and the quay to welcome King Caspian home again. Rilian, 
who had changed his black clothes and was now dressed in a scarlet cloak over silver mail, stood close to 
the water's edge, bare-headed, to receive his father; and the Dwarf Trumpkin sat beside him in his little 
donkey-chair. 
The children saw there would be no chance of reaching the Prince through all that crowd, and, anyway, 
they now felt rather shy. So they asked the Centaurs if they might go on sitting on their backs a little 
longer and thus see everything over the heads of the courtiers. And the Centaurs said they might. 

A flourish of silver trumpets came over the water from the ship's deck: the sailors threw a rope; rats 
(Talking Rats, of course) and Marsh-wiggles made it fast ashore; and the ship was warped in. Musicians, 
hidden somewhere in the crowd, began to play solemn, triumphal music. And soon the King's galleon was 
alongside and the Rats ran the gangway on board her. 
Jill expected to see the old King come down it. But there appeared to be some hitch. A Lord with a pale 
face came ashore and knelt to the Prince and to Trumpkin. The three were talking with their heads close 
together for a few minutes, but no one could hear what they said. The music played on, but you could feel 
that everyone was becoming uneasy. Then four Knights, carrying something and going very slowly, 
appeared on deck. When they started to come down the gangway you could see what they were carrying: 
it was the old King on a bed, very pale and still. They set him down. The Prince knelt beside him and 
embraced him. They could see King Caspian raising his hand to bless his son. And everyone cheered, but 
it was a half-hearted cheer, for they all felt that something was going wrong. Then suddenly the King's 
head fell back upon his pillows, the musicians stopped and there was a dead silence. The Prince, kneeling 
by the King's bed, laid down his head upon it and wept. 
There were whisperings and goings to and fro. Then Jill noticed that all who wore hats, bonnets, helmets, 
or hoods were taking them off - Eustace included. Then she heard a rustling and flapping noise up above 
the castle; when she looked she saw that the great banner with the golden Lion on it was being brought 
down to half-mast. And after that, slowly, mercilessly, with wailing strings and disconsolate blowing of 
horns, the music began again: this time, a tune to break your heart. 
They both slipped off their Centaurs (who took no notice of them). 
"I wish I was at home," said Jill. 
Eustace nodded, saying nothing, and bit his lip. 
"I have come," said a deep voice behind them. They turned and saw the Lion himself, so bright and real 
and strong that everything else began at once to look pale and shadowy compared with him. And in less 
time than it takes to breathe Jill forgot about the dead King of Narnia and remembered only how she had 
made Eustace fall over the cliff, and how she had helped to muff nearly all the signs, and about all the 
snappings and quarrellings. 
And she wanted to say "I'm sorry" but she could not speak. Then the Lion drew them towards him with 
his eyes, and bent down and touched their pale faces with his tongue, and said: 

"Think of that no more. I will not always be scolding. You have done the work for which I sent you into 
Narnia." 
"Please, Aslan," said Jill, "may we go home now?" 
"Yes. I have come to bring you Home," said Aslan. Then he opened his mouth wide and blew. But this 
time they had no sense of flying through the air: instead, it seemed that they remained still, and the wild 
breath of Aslan blew away the ship and the dead King and the castle and the snow and the winter sky. For 
all these things floated off into the air like wreaths of smoke, and suddenly they were standing in a great 
brightness of mid-summer sunshine, on smooth turf, among mighty trees, and beside a fair, fresh stream. 
Then they saw that they were once more on the Mountain of Aslan, high up above and beyond the end of 
that world in which Narnia lies. But the strange thing was that the funeral music for King Caspian still 
went on, though no one could tell where it came from. They were walking beside the stream and the Lion 
went before them: and he became so beautiful, and the music so despairing, that Jill did not know which 
of them it was that filled her eyes with tears. 
Then Aslan stopped, and the children looked into the stream. And there, on the golden gravel of the bed 
of the stream, lay King Caspian, dead, with the water flowing over him like liquid glass. His long white 
beard swayed in it like water-weed. And all three stood and wept. Even the Lion wept: great Lion-tears, 
each tear more precious than the Earth would be if it was a single solid diamond. And Jill noticed that 
Eustace looked neither like a child crying, nor like a boy crying and wanting to hide it, but like a grownup 
crying. At least, that is the nearest she could get to it; but really, as she said, people don't seem to have 
any particular ages on that mountain. 
"Son of Adam," said Aslan, "go into that thicket and pluck the thorn that you will find there, and bring it 
to me." 
Eustace obeyed. The thorn was a foot long and sharp as a rapier. 
"Drive it into my paw, Son of Adam," said Aslan, holding up his right fore-paw and spreading out the 
great pad towards Eustace. 

"Must I?" said Eustace. 
"Yes," said Aslan. 
Then Eustace set his teeth and drove the thorn into the Lion's pad. And there came out a great drop of 
blood, redder than all redness that you have ever seen or imagined. 
And it splashed into the stream over the dead body of the King. At the same moment the doleful music 
stopped. And the dead King began to be changed. 
His white beard turned to grey, and from grey to yellow, and got shorter and vanished altogether; and his 
sunken cheeks grew round and fresh, and the wrinkles were smoothed, and his eyes opened, and his eyes 
and lips both laughed, and suddenly he leaped up and stood before them - a very young man, or a boy. 
(But Jill couldn't say which, because of people having no particular ages in Aslan's country. Even in this 
world, of course, it is the stupidest children who are most childish and the stupidest grown-ups who are 
most grownup.) And he rushed to Aslan and flung his arms as far as they would go round the huge neck; 
and he gave Aslan the strong kisses of a King, and Aslan gave him the wild kisses of a Lion. 
At last Caspian turned to the others. He gave a great laugh of astonished joy. 
"Why! Eustace!" he said. "Eustace! So you did reach the end of the world after all. What about my 
second-best sword that you broke on the sea-serpent?" 
Eustace made a step towards him with both hands held out, but then drew back with a somewhat startled 
expression. 
"Look here! I say," he stammered. "It's all very well. But aren't you? - I mean didn't you -?" 
"Oh, don't be such an ass," said Caspian. 

"But," said Eustace, looking at Aslan. "Hasn't he - er died?" 
"Yes," said the Lion in a very quiet voice, almost (Jill thought) as if he were laughing. "He has died. 
Most people have, you know. Even I have. There are very few who haven't." 
"Oh," said Caspian. "I see what's bothering you. You think I'm a ghost, or some nonsense. But don't you 
see? I would be that if I appeared in Narnia now: because I don't belong there any more. But one can't be a 
ghost in one's own country. I might be a ghost if I got into your world. I don't know. But I suppose it isn't 
yours either, now you're here." 
A great hope rose in the children's hearts. But Aslan shook his shaggy head. "No, my dears," he said. 
"When you meet me here again, you will have come to stay. But not now. You must go back to your own 
world for a while." 
"Sir," said Caspian, "I've always wanted to have just one glimpse of their world. Is that wrong?" 
"You cannot want wrong things any more, now that you have died, my son," said Aslan. "And you shall 
see their world - for five minutes of their time. It will take no longer for you to set things right there." 
Then Aslan explained to Caspian what Jill and Eustace were going back to and all about Experiment 
House: he seemed to know it quite as well as they did. 
"Daughter," said Aslan to Jill, "pluck a switch off that bush." She did; and as soon as it was in her hand it 
turned into a fine new riding crop. 
"Now, Sons of Adam, draw your swords," said Aslan. "But use only the flat, for it is cowards and 
children, not warriors, against whom 1 send you." 
"Are you coming with us, Aslan?" said Jill. 
"They shall see only my back," said Aslan. 

He led them rapidly through the wood, and before they had gone many paces, the wall of Experiment 
House appcared before them. Then Aslan roared so that the sun shook in the sky and thirty feet of the wall 
fell down before them. They looked through the gap, down into the school shrubbery and on to the roof of 
the gym, all under the same dull autumn sky which they had seen before their adventures began. Aslan 
turned to Jill and Eustace and breathed upon them and touched their foreheads with his tongue. Then he 
lay down amid the gap he had made in the wall and turned his golden back to England, and his lordly face 
towards his own lands. At the same moment Jill saw figures whom she knew only too well running up 
through the laurels towards them. Most of the gang were there Adela Pennyfather and Cholmondely 
Major, Edith Winterblott, `Spotty' Sorrier, big Bannister, and the two loathsome Garrett twins. But 
suddenly they stopped. Their faces changed, and all the meanness, conceit, cruelty, and sneakishness 
almost disappeared in one single expression of terror. For they saw the wall fallen down, and a lion as 
large as a young elephant lying in the gap, and three figures in glittering clothes with weapons in their 
hands rushing down upon them. For, with the strength of Aslan in them, Jill plied her crop on the girls and 
Caspian and Eustace plied the flats of their swords on the boys so well that in two minutes all the bullies 
were running like mad, crying out, `Murder! Fascists! Lions! It isn't fair.' And then the Head (who was, by 
the way, a woman) came running out to see what was happening. And when she saw the lion and the 
broken wall and Caspian and Jill and Eustace (whom she quite failed to recognize) she had hysterics and 
went back to the house and began ringing up the police with stories about a lion escaped from a circus, 
and escaped convicts who broke down walls and carried drawn swords. 
In the midst of all this fuss Jill and Eustace slipped quietly indoors and changed out of their bright clothes 
into ordinary things, and Caspian went back into his own world. And the wall, at Aslan's word, was made 
whole again. When the police arrived and found no lion, no broken wall, and no convicts, and the Head 
behaving like a lunatic, there was an inquiry into the whole thing. And in the inquiry all sorts of things 
about Experiment House came out, and about ten people got expelled. After that, the Head's friends saw 
that the Head was no use as a Head, so they got her made an Inspector to interfere with other Heads. And 
when they found she wasn't much good even at that, they got her into Parliament where she lived happily 
ever after. 
Eustace buried his fine clothes secretly one night in the school grounds, but Jill smuggled hers home and 
wore them at a fancy-dress ball next holidays. And from that day forth things changed for the better at 
Experiment House, and it became quite a good school. And Jill and Eustace were always friends. 
But far off in Narnia, King Rilian buried his father, Caspian the Navigator, Tenth of that name, and 
mourned for him. He himself ruled Narnia well and the land was happy in his days, though Puddleglum 
(whose foot was as good as new in three weeks) often pointed out that bright mornings brought on wet 
afternoons, and that you couldn't expect good times to last. 
The opening into the hillside was left open, and often in hot summer days the Narnians go in there with 

ships and lanterns and down to the water and sail to and fro, singing, on the cool, dark underground sea, 
telling each other stories of the cities that lie fathoms deep below. If ever you have the luck to go to 
Narnia yourself, do not forget to have a look at those caves. 
ONCE there were four children whose names were Peter, Susan, Edmund, and Lucy, and it has been told 
in another book called The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe how they had a remarkable adventure. They 
had opened the door of a magic wardrobe and found themselves in a quite different world from ours, and 
in that different world they had become Kings and Queens in a country called Narnia. While they were in 
Narnia they seemed to reign for years and years; but when they came back through the door and found 
themselves in England again, it all seemed to have taken no time at all. At any rate, no one noticed that 
they had ever been away, and they never told anyone except one very wise grown-up. 
That had all happened a year ago, and now all four of them were sitting on a seat at a railway station 
with trunks and playboxes piled up round them. They were, in fact, on their way back to school. They had 
travelled together as far as this station, which was a junction; and here, in a few minutes, one train would 
arrive and take the girls away to one school, and in about half an hour another train would arrive and the 
boys would go off to another school. The first part of the journey, when they were all together, always 
seemed to be part of the holidays; but now when they would be saying good-bye and going different ways 
so soon, everyone felt that the holidays were really over and everyone felt their term-time feelings 
beginning again, and they were all rather gloomy and no one could think of anything to say. Lucy was 
going to boarding school for the first time. 
It was an empty, sleepy, country station and there was hardly anyone on the platform except themselves. 
Suddenly Lucy gave a sharp little cry, like someone who has been stung by a wasp. 
"What's up, Lu?" said Edmund - and then suddenly broke off and made a noise like "Ow!" 
"What on earth-",began Peter, and then he too suddenly changed what he had been going to say. Instead, 
he said, "Susan, let go! What are you doing? Where are you dragging me to?" 
"I'm not touching you," said Susan. "Someone is pulling me. Oh - oh -oh -stop it!" 
Everyone noticed that all the others' faces had gone very white. 
"I felt just the same," said Edmund in a breathless voice. "As if I were being dragged along. A most 
frightful pulling-ugh! it's beginning again." 

"Me too," said Lucy. "Oh, I can't bear it." 
"Look sharp!" shouted Edmund. "All catch hands and keep together. This is magic - I can tell by the 
feeling. Quick!" 
"Yes," said Susan. "Hold hands. Oh, I do wish it would stop-oh!" 
Next moment the luggage, the seat, the platform, and the station had completely vanished. The four 
children, holding hands and panting, found themselves standing in a woody place - such a woody place 
that branches were sticking into them and there was hardly room to move. They all rubbed their eyes and 
took a deep breath. 
"Oh, Peter!" exclaimed Lucy. "Do you think we can possibly have got back to Narnia?" 
"It might be anywhere," said Peter. "I can't see a yard in all these trees. Let's try to get into the open - if 
there is any open." 
With some difficulty, and with some stings from nettles and pricks from thorns, they struggled out of the 
thicket. Then they had another surprise. Everything became much brighter, and after a few steps they 
found themselves at the edge of the wood, looking down on a sandy beach. A few yards away a very calm 
sea was falling on the sand with such tiny ripples that it made hardly any sound. There was no land in 
sight and no clouds in the sky. The sun was about where it ought to be at ten o'clock in the morning, and 
the sea was a dazzling blue. They stood sniffing in the sea-smell. 
"By Jove!" said Peter. "This is good enough." 
Five minutes later everyone was barefooted and wading in the cool clear water. 
"This is better than being in a stuffy train on the way back to Latin and French and Algebra!" said 

Edmund. And then for quite a long time there was no more talking, only splashing and looking for 
shrimps and crabs. 
"All the same," said Susan presently, "I suppose we'll have to make some plans. We shall want 
something to eat before long." 
"We've got the sandwiches Mother gave us for the journey," said Edmund. "At least I've got mine." 
"Not me," said Lucy. "Mine were in my little bag." 
"So were mine," said Susan. 
"Mine are in my coat-pocket, there on the beach," said Peter. "That'll be two lunches among four. This 
isn't going to be such fun." 
"At present," said Lucy, "I want something to drink more than something to eat." 
Everyone else now felt thirsty, as one usually is after wading in salt water under a hot sun. 
"It's like being shipwrecked," remarked Edmund. "In the books they always find springs of clear, fresh 
water on the island. We'd better go and look for them." 
"Does that mean we have to go back into all that thick wood?" said Susan. 
"Not a bit of it," said Peter. "If there are streams they're bound to come down to the sea, and if we walk 
along the beach we're bound to come to them." 
They all now waded back and went first across the smooth, wet sand and then up to the dry, crumbly 

sand that sticks to one's toes, and began putting on their shoes and socks. Edmund and Lucy wanted to 
leave them behind and do their exploring with bare feet, but Susan said this would be a mad thing to do. 
"We might never find them again," she pointed out, "and we shall want them if we're still here when night 
comes and it begins to be cold." 
When they were dressed again they set out along the shore with the sea on their left hand and the wood 
on their right. Except for an occasional seagull it was a very quiet place. The wood was so thick and 
tangled that they could hardly see into it at all; and nothing in it moved - not a bird, not even an insect. 
Shells and seaweed and anemones, or tiny crabs in rockpools, are all very well, but you soon get tired of 
them if you are thirsty. The children's feet, after the change from the cool water, felt hot and heavy. Susan 
and Lucy had raincoats to carry. Edmund had put down his coat on the station seat just before the magic 
overtook them, and he and Peter took it in turns to carry Peter's great-coat. 
Presently the shore began to curve round to the right. About quarter of an hour later, after they had 
crossed a rocky ridge which ran out into a point, it made quite a sharp turn. Their backs were now to the 
part of the sea which had met them when they first came out of the wood, and now, looking ahead, they 
could see across the water another shore, thickly wooded like the one they were exploring. 
"I wonder, is that an island or do we join on to it presently?" said Lucy. 
"Don't know," said Peter and they all plodded on in silence. 
The shore that they were walking on drew nearer and nearer to the opposite shore, and as they came 
round each promontory the children expected to find the place where the two joined. But in this they were 
disappointed. They came to some rocks which they had to climb and from the top they could see a fairway 
ahead and - "Oh bother!" said Edmund, "it's no good. We shan't be able to get to those other woods at all. 
We're on an island!" 
It was true. At this point the channel between them and the opposite coast was only about thirty or forty 
yards wide; but they could now see that this was its narrowest place. After that, their own coast bent 
round to the right again and they could see open sea between it and the mainland. It was obvious that they 
had already come much more than halfway round the island. 

"Look!" said Lucy suddenly. "What's that?" She pointed to a long, silvery, snake-like thing that lay 
across the beach. 
"A stream! A stream!" shouted the others, and, tired as they were, they lost no time in clattering down 
the rocks and racing to the fresh water. They knew that the stream would be better to drink farther up, 
away from the beach, so they went at once to the spot where it came out of the wood. The trees were as 
thick as ever, but the stream had made itself a deep course between high mossy banks so that by stooping 
you could follow it up in a sort of tunnel of leaves. They dropped on their knees by the first brown, 
dimply pool and drank and drank, and dipped their faces in the water, and then dipped their arms in up to 
the elbow. 
"Now," said Edmund, "what about those sandwiches?" 
"Oh, hadn't we better have them?" said Susan. "We may need them far worse later on." 
"I do wish," said Lucy, "now that we're not thirsty, we could go on feeling as not-hungry as we did when 
we were thirsty." 
"But what about those sandwiches?" repeated Edmund. "There's no good saving them till they go bad. 
You've got to remember it's a good deal hotter here than in England and we've been carrying them about 
in pockets for hours." So they got out the two packets and divided them into four portions, and nobody 
had quite enough, but it was a great deal better than nothing. Then they talked about their plans for the 
next meal. Lucy wanted to go back to the sea and catch shrimps, until someone pointed out that they had 
no nets. Edmund said they must gather gulls' eggs from the rocks, but when they came to think of it they 
couldn't remember having seen any gulls' eggs and wouldn't be able to cook them if they found any. Peter 
thought to himself that unless they had some stroke of luck they would soon be glad to eat eggs raw, but 
he didn't see any point in saying this out loud. Susan said it was a pity they had eaten the sandwiches so 
soon. One or two tempers very nearly got lost at this stage. Finally Edmund said: 
"Look here. There's only one thing to be done. We must explore the wood. Hermits and knights-errant 
and people like that always manage to live somehow if they're in a forest. They find roots and berries and 
things." 
"What sort of roots?" asked Susan. 

"I always thought it meant roots of trees," said Lucy. 
"Come on," said Peter, "Ed is right. And we must try to do something. And it'll be better than going out 
into the glare and the sun again." 
So they all got up and began to follow the stream. It was very hard work. They had to stoop under 
branches and climb over branches, and they blundered through great masses of stuff like rhododendrons 
and tore their clothes and got their feet wet in the stream; and still there was no noise at all except the 
noise of the stream and the noises they were making themselves. They were beginning to get very tired of 
it when they noticed a delicious smell, and then a flash of bright colour high above them at the top of the 
right bank. 
"I say!" exclaimed Lucy. "I do believe that's an apple tree." 
It was. They panted up the steep bank, forced their way through some brambles, and found themselves 
standing round an old tree that was heavy with large yellowishgolden apples as firm and juicy as you 
could wish to see. 
"And this is not the only tree," said Edmund with his mouth full of apple. "Look there-and there." 
"Why, there are dozens of them," said Susan, throwing away the core of her first apple and picking her 
second. "This must have been an orchard - long, long ago, before the place went wild and the wood grew 
up." 
"Then this was once an inhabited island," said Peter. 
"And what's that?" said Lucy, pointing ahead. 
"By Jove, it's a wall," said Peter. "An old stone wall." 

Pressing their way between the laden branches they reached the wall. It was very old, and broken down 
in places, with moss and wallflowers growing on it, but it was higher than all but the tallest trees. And 
when they came quite close to it they found a great arch which must once have had a gate in it but was 
now almost filled up with the largest of all the apple trees. They had to break some of the branches to get 
past, and when they had done so they all blinked because the daylight became suddenly much brighter. 
They found themselves in a wide open place with walls all round it. In here there were no trees, only level 
grass and daisies, and ivy, and grey walls. It was a bright, secret, quiet place, and rather sad; and all four 
stepped out into the middle of it, glad to be able to straighten their backs and move their limbs freely. 
"THIS wasn't a garden," said Susan presently. "It was a castle and this must have been the courtyard." 
"I see what you mean," said Peter. "Yes. That is the remains of a tower. And there is what used to be a 
flight of steps going up to the top of the walls. And look at those other steps - the broad, shallow ones - 
going up to that doorway. It must have been the door into the great hall." 
"Ages ago, by the look of it," said Edmund. 
"Yes, ages ago," said Peter. "I wish we could find out who the people were that lived in this castle; and 
how long ago." 
"It gives me a queer feeling," said Lucy. 
"Does it, Lu?" said Peter, turning and looking hard at her. "Because it does the same to me. It is the 
queerest thing that has happened this queer day. I wonder where we are and what it all means?" 

While they were talking they had crossed the courtyard and gone through the other doorway into what 
had once been the hall. This was now very like the courtyard, for the roof had long since disappeared and 
it was merely another space of grass and daisies, except that it was shorter and narrower and the walls 
were higher. Across the far end there was a kind of terrace about three feet higher than the rest. 
"I wonder, was it really the hall?" said Susan. "What is that terrace kind of thing?" 
"Why, you silly," said Peter (who had become strangely excited), "don't you see? That was the dais 
where the High Table was, where the King and the great lords sat. Anyone would think you had forgotten 
that we ourselves were once Kings and Queens and sat on a dais just like that, in our great hall." 
"In our castle of Cair Paravel," continued Susan in a dreamy and rather sing-song voice, "at the mouth of 
the great river of Narnia. How could I forget?" 
"How it all comes back!" said Lucy. "We could pretend we were in Cair Paravel now. This hall must 
have been very like the great hall we feasted in." 
"But unfortunately without the feast," said Edmund. "It's getting late, you know. Look how long the 
shadows are. And have you noticed that it isn't so hot?" 
"We shall need a camp-fire if we've got to spend the night here," said Peter. "I've got matches. Let's go 
and see if we can collect some dry wood." 
Everyone saw the sense of this, and for the next halfhour they were busy. The orchard through which 
they had first come into the ruins turned out not to be a good place for firewood. They tried the other side 
of the castle, passing out of the hall by a little side door into a maze of stony humps and hollows which 
must once have been passages and smaller rooms but was now all nettles and wild roses. Beyond this they 
found a wide gap in the castle wall and stepped through it into a wood of darker and bigger trees where 
they found dead branches and rotten wood and sticks and dry leaves and fir-cones in plenty. They went to 
and fro with bundles until they had a good pile on the dais. At the fifth journey they found the well, just 
outside the hall, hidden in weeds, but clean and fresh and deep when they had cleared these away. 

The remains of a stone pavement ran half-way round it. Then the girls went out to pick some more 
apples and the boys built the fire, on the dais and fairly close to the corner between two walls, which they 
thought would be the snuggest and warmest place. They had great difficulty in lighting it and used a lot of 
matches, but they succeeded in the end. Finally, all four sat down with their backs to the wall and their 
faces to the fire. They tried roasting some of the apples on the ends of sticks. But roast apples are not 
much good without sugar, and they are too hot to eat with your fingers till they are too cold to be worth 
eating. So they had to content themselves with raw apples, which, as Edmund said, made one realize that 
school suppers weren't so bad after all - "I shouldn't mind a good thick slice of bread and margarine this 
minute," he added. But the spirit of adventure was rising in them all, and no one really wanted to be back 
at school. 
Shortly after the last apple had been eaten, Susan went out to the well to get another drink. When she 
came back she was carrying something in her hand. 
"Look," she said in a rather choking kind of voice. "I found it by the well." She handed it to Peter and sat 
down. The others thought she looked and sounded as if she might be going to cry. Edmund and Lucy 
eagerly bent forward to see what was in Peter's hand - a little, bright thing that gleamed in the firelight. 
"Well, I'm - I'm jiggered," said Peter, and his voice also sounded queer. Then he handed it to the others. 
All now saw what it was - a little chess-knight, ordinary in size but extraordinarily heavy because it was 
made of pure gold; and the eyes in the horse's head were two tiny little rubies or rather one was, for the 
other had been knocked out. 
"Why!" said Lucy, "it's exactly like one of the golden chessmen we used to play with when we were 
Kings and Queens at Cair Paravel." 
"Cheer up, Su," said Peter to his other sister. 
"I can't help it," said Susan. "It brought back - oh, such lovely times. And I remembered playing chess 
with fauns and good giants, and the mer-people singing in the sea, and my beautiful horse - and - and -" 
"Now," said Peter in a quite different voice, "it's about time we four started using our brains." 

"What about?" asked Edmund. 
"Have none of you guessed where we are?" said Peter. 
"Go on, go on," said Lucy. "I've felt for hours that there was some wonderful mystery hanging over this 
place." 
"Fire ahead, Peter," said Edmund. "We're all listening." 
"We are in the ruins of Cair Paravel itself," said Peter. 
"But, I say," replied Edmund. "I mean, how do you make that out? This place has been ruined for ages. 
Look at all those big trees growing right up to the gates. Look at the very stones. Anyone can see that 
nobody has lived here for hundreds of years." 
"I know," said Peter. "That is the difficulty. But let's leave that out for the moment. I want to take the 
points one by one. First point: this hall is exactly the same shape and size as the hall at Cair Paravel. Just 
picture a roof on this, and a coloured pavement instead of grass, and tapestries on the walls, and you get 
our royal banqueting hall." 
No one said anything. 
"Second point," continued Peter. "The castle well is exactly where our well was, a little to the south of 
the great hall; and it is exactly the same size and shape." 
Again there was no reply. 

"Third point: Susan has just found one of our old chessmen - or something as like one of them as two 
peas." 
Still nobody answered. 
"Fourth point. Don't you remember - it was the very day before the ambassadors came from the King of 
Calormen don't you remember planting the orchard outside the north gate of Cair Paravel? The greatest of 
all the wood-people, Pomona herself, came to put good spells on it. It was those very decent little chaps 
the moles who did the actual digging. Can you have forgotten that funny old Lilygloves, the chief mole, 
leaning on his spade and saying, `Believe me, your Majesty, you'll be glad of these fruit trees one day.' 
And by Jove he was right." 
"I do! I do!" said Lucy, and clapped her hands. 
"But look here, Peter," said Edmund. "This must be all rot. To begin with, we didn't plant the orchard 
slap up against the gate. We wouldn't have been such fools." 
"No, of course not," said Peter. "But it has grown up to the gate since." 
"And for another thing," said Edmund, "Cair Paravel wasn't on an island." 
"Yes, I've been wondering about that. But it was a what-do-you-call-it, a peninsula. Jolly nearly an 
island. Couldn't it have been made an island since our time? Somebody has dug a channel." 
"But half a moment!" said Edmund. "You keep on saying since our time. But it's only a year ago since we 
came back from Narnia. And you want to make out that in one year castles have fallen down, and great 
forests have grown up, and little trees we saw planted ourselves have turned into a big old orchard, and 
goodness knows what else. It's all impossible." 
"There's one thing," said Lucy. "If this is Cair Paravel there ought to be a door at this end of the dais. In 
fact we ought to be sitting with our backs against it at this moment. You know - the door that led down to 
the treasure chamber." 

"I suppose there isn't a door," said Peter, getting up. 
The wall behind them was a mass of ivy. 
"We can soon find out," said Edmund, taking up one of the sticks that they had laid ready for putting on 
the fire. He began beating the ivied wall. Tap-tap went the stick against the stone; and again, tap-tap; and 
then, all at once, boomboom, with a quite different sound, a hollow, wooden sound. 
"Great Scott!" said Edmund. 
"We must clear this ivy away," said Peter. 
"Oh, do let's leave it alone," said Susan. "We can try it in the morning. If we've got to spend the night 
here I don't want an open door at my back and a great big black hole that anything might come out of, 
besides the draught and the damp. And it'll soon be dark." 
"Susan! How can you?" said Lucy with a reproachful glance. But both the boys were too much excited to 
take any notice of Susan's advice. They worked at the ivy with their hands and with Peter's pocket-knife 
till the knife broke. After that they used Edmund's. Soon the whole place where they had been sitting was 
covered with ivy; and at last they had the door cleared. 
"Locked, of course," said Peter. 
"But the wood's all rotten," said Edmund. "We can pull it to bits in no time, and it will make extra 
firewood. Come on." 
It took them longer than they expected and, before they had done, the great hall had grown dusky and the 
first star or two had come out overhead. Susan was not the only one who felt a slight shudder as the boys 
stood above the pile of splintered wood, rubbing the dirt off their hands and staring into the cold, dark 

opening they had made. 
"Now for a torch," said Peter. 
"Oh, what is the good?" said Susan. "And as Edmund said -" 
"I'm not saying it now," Edmund interrupted. "I still don't understand, but we can settle that later. I 
suppose you're coming down, Peter?" 
"We must," said Peter. "Cheer up, Susan. It's no good behaving like kids now that we are back in Narnia. 
You're a Queen here. And anyway no one could go to sleep with a mystery like this on their minds." 
They tried to use long sticks as torches but this was not a success. If you held them with the lighted end 
up they went out, and if you held them the other way they scorched your hand and the smoke got in your 
eyes. In the end they had to use Edmund's electric torch; luckily it had been a birthday present less than a 
week ago and the battery was almost new. He went first, with the light. Then came Lucy, then Susan, and 
Peter brought up the rear. 
"I've come to the top of the steps," said Edmund. 
"Count them," said Peter. 
"One - two - three," said Edmund, as he went cautiously down, and so up to sixteen. "And this is the 
bottom," he shouted back. 
"Then it really must be Cair Paravel," said Lucy. "There were sixteen." Nothing more was said till all 
four were standing in a knot together at the foot of the stairway. Then Edmund flashed his torch slowly 
round. 

"O - o - o - oh!!" said all the children at once. 
For now all knew that it was indeed the ancient treasure chamber of Cair Paravel where they had once 
reigned as Kings and Queens of Narnia. There was a kind of path up the middle (as it might be in a 
greenhouse), and along each side at intervals stood rich suits of armour, like knights guarding the 
treasures. In between the suits of armour, and on each side of the path, were shelves covered with 
precious things - necklaces and arm rings and finger rings and golden bowls and dishes and long tusks of 
ivory, brooches and coronets and chains of gold, and heaps of unset stones lying piled anyhow as if they 
were marbles or potatoes - diamonds, rubies, carbuncles, emeralds, topazes, and amethysts. Under the 
shelves stood great chests of oak strengthened with iron bars and heavily padlocked. And it was bitterly 
cold, and so still that they could hear themselves breathing, and the treasures were so covered with dust 
that unless they had realized where they were and remembered most of the things, they would hardly have 
known they were treasures. There was something sad and a little frightening about the place, because it all 
seemed so forsaken and long ago. That was why nobody said anything for at least a minute. 
Then, of course, they began walking about and picking things up to look at. It was like meeting very old 
friends. If you had been there you would have heard them saying things like, "Oh look! Our coronation 
rings - do you remember first wearing this? - Why, this is the little brooch we all thought was lost - I say, 
isn't that the armour you wore in the great tournament in the Lone Islands? - do you remember the dwarf 
making that for me? - do you remember drinking out of that horn? - do you remember, do you 
remember?" 
But suddenly Edmund said, "Look here. We mustn't waste the battery: goodness knows how often we 
shall need it. Hadn't we better take what we want and get out again?" 
"We must take the gifts," said Peter. For long ago at a Christmas in Narnia he and Susan and Lucy had 
been given certain presents which they valued more than their whole kingdom. Edmund had had no gift, 
because he was not with them at the time. (This was his own fault, and you can read about it in the other 
book.) 
They all agreed with Peter and walked up the path to the wall at the far end of the treasure chamber, and 
there, sure enough, the gifts were still hanging. Lucy's was the smallest for it was only a little bottle. But 
the bottle was made of diamond instead of glass, and it was still more than half full of the magical cordial 
which would heal almost every wound and every illness. Lucy said nothing and looked very solemn as 
she took her gift down from its place and slung the belt over her shoulder and once more felt the bottle at 
her side where it used to hang in the old days. Susan's gift had been a bow and arrows and a horn. The 
bow was still there, and the ivory quiver, full of wellfeathered arrows, but - "Oh, Susan," said Lucy. 
"Where's the horn?" 

"Oh bother, bother, bother," said Susan after she had thought for a moment. "I remember now. I took it 
with me the last day of all, the day we went hunting the White Stag. It must have got lost when we 
blundered back into that other place - England, I mean." 
Edmund whistled. It was indeed a shattering loss; for this was an enchanted horn and, whenever you 
blew it, help was certain to come to you, wherever you were. 
"Just the sort of thing that might come in handy in a place like this," said Edmund. 
"Never mind," said Susan, "I've still got the bow." And she took it. 
"Won't the string be perished, Su?" said Peter. 
But whether by some magic in the air of the treasure chamber or not, the bow was still in working order. 
Archery and swimming were the things Susan was good at. In a moment she had bent the bow and then 
she gave one little pluck to the string. It twanged: a chirruping twang that vibrated through the whole 
room. And that one small noise brought back the old days to the children's minds more than anything that 
had happened yet. All the battles and hunts and feasts came rushing into their heads together. 
Then she unstrung the bow again and slung the quiver at her side. 
Next, Peter took down his gift - the shield with the great red lion on it, and the royal sword. He blew, 
and rapped them on the floor, to get off the dust. He fitted the shield on his arm and slung the sword by 
his side. He was afraid at first that it might be rusty and stick to the sheath. But it was not so. With one 
swift motion he drew it and held it up, shining in the torchlight. 
"It is my sword Rhindon," he said; "with it I killed the Wolf." There was a new tone in his voice, and the 
others all felt that he was really Peter the High King again. Then, after a little pause, everyone 
remembered that they must save the battery. 

They climbed the stair again and made up a good fire and lay down close together for warmth. The 
ground was very hard and uncomfortable, but they fell asleep in the end. 
THE worst of sleeping out of doors is that you wake up so dreadfully early. And when you wake you 
have to get up because the ground is so hard that you are uncomfortable. And it makes matters worse if 
there is nothing but apples for breakfast and you have had nothing but apples for supper the night before. 
When Lucy had said - truly enough that it was a glorious morning, there did not seem to be anything else 
nice to be said. Edmund said what everyone was feeling, "We've simply got to get off this island." 
When they had drunk from the well and splashed their faces they all went down the stream again to the 
shore and stared at the channel which divided them from the mainland. 
"We'll have to swim," said Edmund. 
"It would be all right for Su," said Peter (Susan had won prizes for swimming at school). "But I don't 
know about the rest of us." By "the rest of us" he really meant Edmund who couldn't yet do two lengths at 
the school baths, and Lucy, who could hardly swim at all. 
"Anyway," said Susan, "there may be currents. Father says it's never wise to bathe in a place you don't 
know." 
"But, Peter," said Lucy, "look here. I know I can't swim for nuts at home - in England, I mean. But 
couldn't we all swim long ago - if it was long ago - when we were Kings and Queens in Narnia? We could 
ride then too, and do all sorts of things. Don't you think -?" 

"Ah, but we were sort of grown-up then," said Peter. 
"We reigned for years and years and learned to do things. Aren't we just back at our proper ages again 
now?" 
"Oh!" said Edmund in a voice which made everyone stop talking and listen to him. 
"I've just seen it all," he said. 
"Seen what?" asked Peter. 
"Why, the whole thing," said Edmund. "You know what we were puzzling about last night, that it was 
only a year ago since we left Narnia but everything looks as if no one had lived in Cair Paravel for 
hundreds of years? Well, don't you see? You know that, however long we seemed to have lived in Narnia, 
when we got back through the wardrobe it seemed to have taken no time at all?" 
"Go on," said Susan. "I think I'm beginning to understand." 
"And that means," continued Edmund, "that, once you're out of Narnia, you have no idea how Narnian 
time is going. Why shouldn't hundreds of years have gone past in Narnia while only one year has passed 
for us in England?" 
"By Jove, Ed," said Peter. "I believe you've got it. In that sense it really was hundreds of years ago that 
we lived in Cair Paravel. And now we're coming back to Narnia just as if we were Crusaders or Anglo- 
Saxons or Ancient Britons or someone coming back to modern England?" 
"How excited they'll be to see us -" began Lucy, but at the same moment everyone else said, "Hush!" or 
"Look!" For now something was happening. 

There was a wooded point on the mainland a little to their right, and they all felt sure that just beyond 
that point must be the mouth of the river. And now, round that point there came into sight a boat. When it 
had cleared the point, it turned and began coming along the channel towards them. There were two people 
on board, one rowing, the other sitting in the stern and holding a bundle that twitched and moved as if it 
were alive. Both these people seemed to be soldiers. They had steel caps on their heads and light shirts of 
chain-mail. Their faces were bearded and hard. The children drew back from the beach into the wood and 
watched without moving a finger. 
"This'll do," said the soldier in the stern when the boat had come about opposite to them. 
"What about tying a stone to his feet, Corporal?" said the other, resting on his oars. 
"Garn!" growled the other. "We don't need that, and we haven't brought one. He'll drown sure enough 
without a stone, as long as we've tied the cords right." With these words he rose and lifted his bundle. 
Peter now saw that it was really alive and was in fact a Dwarf, bound hand and foot but struggling as hard 
as he could. Next moment he heard a twang just beside his ear, and all at once the soldier threw up his 
arms, dropping the Dwarf into the bottom of the boat, and fell over into the water. He floundered away to 
the far bank and Peter knew that Susan's arrow had struck on his helmet. He turned and saw that she was 
very pale but was already fitting a second arrow to the string. But it was never used. As soon as he saw 
his companion fall, the other soldier, with a loud cry, jumped out of the boat on the far side, and lie also 
floundered through the water (which was apparently just in his depth) and disappeared into the woods of 
the mainland. 
"Quick! Before she drifts!" shouted Peter. He and Susan, fully dressed as they were, plunged in, and 
before the water was up to their shoulders their hands were on the side of the boat. In a few seconds they 
had hauled her to the bank and lifted the Dwarf out, and Edmund was busily engaged in cutting his bonds 
with the pocket knife. (Peter's sword would have been sharper, but a sword is very inconvenient for this 
sort of work because you can't hold it anywhere lower than the hilt.) When at last the Dwarf was free, he 
sat up, rubbed his arms and legs, and exclaimed: 
"Well, whatever they say, you don't feel like ghosts." 
Like most Dwarfs he was very stocky and deep-chested. He would have been about three feet high if he 
had been standing up, and an immense beard and whiskers of coarse red hair left little of his face to be 
seen except a beak-like nose and twinkling black eyes. 

"Anyway," he continued, "ghosts or not, you've saved my life and I'm extremely obliged to you." 
"But why should we be ghosts?" asked Lucy. 
"I've been told all my life," said the Dwarf, "that these woods along the shore were as full of ghosts as 
they were of trees. That's what the story is. And that's why, when they want to get rid of anyone, they 
usually bring him down here (like they were doing with me) and say they'll leave him to the ghosts. But I 
always wondered if they didn't really drown 'em or cut their throats. I never quite believed in the ghosts. 
But those two cowards you've just shot believed all right. They were more frightened of taking me to my 
death than I was of going!" 
"Oh," said Susan. "So that's why they both ran away." 
"Eh? What's that?" said the Dwarf. 
"They got away," said Edmund. "To the mainland." 
"I wasn't shooting to kill, you know," said Susan. She would not have liked anyone to think she could 
miss at such a short range. 
"Hm," said the Dwarf. "That's not so good. That may mean trouble later on. Unless they hold their 
tongues for their own sake." 
"What were they going to drown you for?" asked Peter. 
"Oh, I'm a dangerous criminal, I am," said the Dwarf cheerfully. "But that's a long story. Meantime, I 
was wondering if perhaps you were going to ask me to breakfast? You've no idea what an appetite it gives 
one, being executed." 

"There's only apples," said Lucy dolefully. 
"Better than nothing, but not so good as fresh fish," said the Dwarf. "It looks as if I'll have to ask you to 
breakfast instead. I saw some fishing tackle in that boat. And anyway, we must take her round to the other 
side of the island. We don't want anyone from the mainland coming down and seeing her." 
"I ought to have thought of that myself," said Peter. 
The four children and the Dwarf went down to the water's edge, pushed off the boat with some 
difficulty, and scrambled aboard. The Dwarf at once took charge. The oars were of course too big for him 
to use, so Peter rowed and the Dwarf steered them north along the channel and presently eastward round 
the tip of the island. From here the children could see right up the river, and all the bays and headlands of 
the coast beyond it. They thought they could recognize bits of it, but the woods, which had grown up 
since their time, made everything look very different. 
When they had come round into open sea on the east of the island, the Dwarf took to fishing. They had 
an excellent catch of pavenders, a beautiful rainbow-coloured fish which they all remembered eating in 
Cair Paravel in the old days. When they had caught enough they ran the boat up into a little creek and 
moored her to a tree. The Dwarf, who was a most capable person (and, indeed, though one meets bad 
Dwarfs, I never heard of a Dwarf who was a fool), cut the fish open, cleaned them, and said: 
"Now, what we want next is some firewood." 
"We've got some up at the castle," said Edmund. 
The Dwarf gave a low whistle. "Beards and bedsteads!" he said. "So there really is a castle, after all?" 
"It's only a ruin," said Lucy. 
The Dwarf stared round at all four of them with a very curious expression on his face. "And who on 
earth - ?" he began, but then broke off and said, "No matter. Breakfast first. But one thing before we go 

on. Can you lay your hand on your hearts and tell me I'm really alive? Are you sure I wasn't drowned and 
we're not all ghosts together?" 
When they had all reassured him, the next question was how to carry the fish. They had nothing to string 
them on and no basket. They had to use Edmund's hat in the end because no one else had a hat. He would 
have made much more fuss about this if he had not by now been so ravenously hungry. 
At first the Dwarf did not seem very comfortable in the castle. He kept looking round and sniffing and 
saying, "H'm. Looks a bit spooky after all. Smells like ghosts, too." But he cheered up when it came to 
lighting the fire and showing them how to roast the fresh pavenders in the embers. Eating hot fish with no 
forks, and one pocket knife between five people, is a messy business and there were several burnt fingers 
before the meal was ended; but, as it was now nine o'clock and they had been up since five, nobody 
minded the burns so much as you might have expected. When everyone had finished off with a drink from 
the well and an apple or so, the Dwarf produced a pipe about the size of his own arm, filled it, lit it, blew a 
great cloud of fragrant smoke, and said, "Now." 
"You tell us your story first," said Peter. "And then we'll tell you ours." 
"Well," said the Dwarf, "as you've saved my life it is only fair you should have your own way. But I 
hardly know where to begin. First of all I'm a messenger of King Caspian's." 
"Who's he?" asked four voices all at once. 
"Caspian the Tenth, King of Narnia, and long may he reign!" answered the Dwarf. "That is to say, he 
ought to be King of Narnia and we hope he will be. At present he is only King of us Old Narnians - " 
"What do you mean by old Narnians, please?" asked Lucy. 
"Why, that's us," said the Dwarf. "We're a kind of rebellion, I suppose." 
"I see," said Peter. "And Caspian is the chief Old Narnian." 

"Well, in a manner of speaking," said the Dwarf, scratching his head. "But he's really a New Narnian 
himself, a Telmarine, if you follow me." 
"I don't," said Edmund. 
"It's worse than the Wars of the Roses," said Lucy. 
"Oh dear," said the Dwarf. "I'm doing this very badly. Look here: I think I'll have to go right back to the 
beginning and tell you how Caspian grew up in his uncle's court and how he comes to be on our side at 
all. But it'll be a long story." 
"All the better," said Lucy. "We love stories." 
So the Dwarf settled down and told his tale. I shall not give it to you in his words, putting in all the 
children's questions and interruptions, because it would take too long and be confusing, and, even so, it 
would leave out some points that the children only heard later. But the gist of the story, as they knew it in 
the end, was as follows. 
PRINCE CASPIAN lived in a great castle in the centre of Narnia with his uncle, Miraz, the King of 
Narnia, and his aunt, who had red hair and was called Queen Prunaprismia. His father and mother were 
dead and the person whom Caspian loved best was his nurse, and though (being a prince) he had 
wonderful toys which would do almost anything but talk, he liked best the last hour of the day when the 
toys had all been put back in their cupboards and Nurse would tell him stories. 

He did not care much for his uncle and aunt, but about twice a week his uncle would send for him and 
they would walk up and down together for half an hour on the terrace at the south side of the castle. One 
day, while they were doing this, the King said to him, 
"Well, boy, we must soon teach you to ride and use a sword. You know that your aunt and I have no 
children, so it looks as if you might have to be King when I'm gone. How shall you like that, eh?" 
"I don't know, Uncle," said Caspian. 
"Don't know, eh?" said Miraz. "Why, I should like to know what more anyone could wish for!" 
"All the same, I do wish," said Caspian. 
"What do you wish?" asked the King. 
"I wish - I wish - I wish I could have lived in the Old Days," said Caspian. (He was only a very little boy 
at the time.) 
Up till now King Miraz had been talking in the tiresome way that some grown-ups have, which makes it 
quite clear that they are not really interested in what you are saying, but now he suddenly gave Caspian a 
very sharp look. 
"Eh? What's that?" he said. "What old days do you mean?" 
"Oh, don't you know, Uncle?" said Caspian. "When everything was quite different. When all the animals 
could talk, and there were nice people who lived in the streams and the trees. Naiads and Dryads they 
were called. And there were Dwarfs. And there were lovely little Fauns in all the woods. They had feet 
like goats. And -" 

"That's all nonsense, for babies," said the King sternly. "Only fit for babies, do you hear? You're getting 
too old for that sort of stuff. At your age you ought to be thinking of battles and adventures, not fairy 
tales." 
"Oh, but there were battles and adventures in those days," said Caspian. "Wonderful adventures. Once 
there was a White Witch and she made herself Queen of the whole country. And she made it so that it was 
always winter. And then two boys and two girls came from somewhere and so they killed the Witch and 
they were made Kings and Queens of Narnia, and their names were Peter and Susan and Edmund and 
Lucy. And so they reigned for ever so long and everyone had a lovely time, and it was all because of 
Aslan -" 
"Who's he?" said Miraz. And if Caspian had been a very little older, the tone of his uncle's voice would 
have warned him that it would be wiser to shut up. But he babbled on, 
"Oh, don't you know?" he said. "Aslan is the great Lion who comes from over the sea." 
"Who has been telling you all this nonsense?" said the King in a voice of thunder. Caspian was frightened 
and said nothing. 
"Your Royal Highness," said King Miraz, letting go of Caspian's hand, which he had been holding till 
now, "I insist upon being answered. Look me in the face. Who has been telling you this pack of lies?" 
"N - Nurse," faltered Caspian, and burst into tears. 
"Stop that noise," said his uncle, taking Caspian by the shoulders and giving ham a shake. "Stop it. And 
never let me catch you talking - or thinking either - about all those silly stories again. There never were 
those Kings and Queens. How could there be two Kings at the same time? And there's no such person as 
Aslan. And there are no such things as lions. And there never was a time when animals could talk. Do you 
hear?" 
"Yes, Uncle," sobbed Caspian. 

"Then let's have no more of it," said the King. Then he called to one of the gentlemen-in-waiting who 
were standing at the far end of the terrace and said in a cold voice, "Conduct His Royal Highness to his 
apartments and send His Royal Highness's nurse to me AT ONCE." 
Next day Caspian found what a terrible thing he had done, for Nurse had been sent away without even 
being allowed to say good-bye to him, and he was told he was to have a Tutor. 
Caspian missed his nurse very much and shed many tears; and because he was so miserable, he thought 
about the old stories of Narnia far more than before. He dreamed of Dwarfs and Dryads every night and 
tried very hard to make the dogs and cats in the castle talk to him. But the dogs only wagged their tails 
and the cats only purred. 
Caspian felt sure that he would hate the new Tutor, buy when the new Tutor arrived about a week later 
he turns out to be the sort of person it is almost impossible not to like. He was the smallest, and also the 
fattest, man Caspian had ever seen. He had a long, silvery, pointed beard which came down to his waist, 
and his face, which was brown and covered with wrinkles, looked very wise, very ugly, and very kind. 
His voice was grave and his eyes were merry so that, until you got to know him really well, it was hard to 
know when he was joking and when he was serious. His name was Doctor Cornelius. 
Of all his lessons with Doctor Cornelius the one that Caspian liked best was History. Up till now, except 
for Nurse's stories, he had known nothing about the History of Narnia, and he was very surprised to learn 
that the royal family were newcomers in the country. 
"It was your Highness's ancestor, Caspian the First," said Doctor Cornelius, "who first conquered Narnia 
and made it his kingdom. It was he who brought all your nation into the country. You are not native 
Narnians at all. You are all Telmarines - that is, you all came from the Land of Telmar, far beyond the 
Western Mountains. That is why Caspian the First is called Caspian the Conqueror." 
"Please, Doctor," asked Caspian one day, "who lived in Narnia before we all came here out of Telmar?" 
"No men - or very few - lived in Narnia before the Telmarines took it," said Doctor Cornelius. 

"Then who did my great-great-grandcesters conquer?" 
"Whom, not who, your Highness," said Doctor Cornelius. "Perhaps it is time to turn from History to 
Grammar." 
"Oh please, not yet!" said Caspian. 
"I mean, wasn't there a battle? Why is he called Caspian the Conqueror if there was nobody to fight with 
him?" 
"I said there were very few men in Narnia," said the Doctor, looking at the little boy very strangely 
through his great spectacles. 
For a moment Caspian was puzzled and then suddenly his heart gave a leap. "Do you mean," he gasped, 
"that there were other things? Do you mean it was like in the stories? Were there-?" 
"Hush!" said Doctor Cornelius, laying his head very close to Caspian's. "Not a word more. Don't you 
know your Nurse was sent away for telling you about Old Narnia? The King doesn't like it. If he found 
me telling you secrets, you'd be whipped and I should have my head cut off." 
"But why?" asked Caspian. 
"1t is high time we turned to Grammar now," said Doctor Cornelius in a loud voice. "Will your Royal 
Highness be pleased to open Pulverulentus Siccus at the fourth page of his Grammatical garden or the 
Arbour of Accidence pleasantlie open'd to Tender Wits?" 
After that it was all nouns and verbs till lunchtime, but I don't think Caspian learned much. He was too 
excited. He felt sure that Doctor Cornelius would not have said so much unless he meant to tell him more 
sooner or later. 

In this he was not disappointed. A few days later his Tutor said, "Tonight I am going to give you a lesson 
in Astronomy. At dead of night two noble planets, Tarva and Alambil, will pass within one degree of each 
other. Such a conjunction has not occurred for two hundred years, and your Highness will not live to see it 
again. It will be best if you go to bed a little earlier than usual. When the time of the conjunction draws 
near I will come and wake you." 
This didn't seem to have anything to do with Old Narnia, which was what Caspian really wanted to hear 
about, but getting up in the middle of the night is always interesting and he was moderately pleased. 
When he went to bed that night, he thought at first that he would not be able to sleep; but he soon dropped 
off and it seemed only a few minutes before he felt someone gently shaking him. 
He sat up in bed and saw that the room was full of moonlight. Doctor Cornelius, muffled in a hooded 
robe and holding a small lamp in his hand, stood by the bedside. 
Caspian remembered at once what they were going to do. He got up and put on some clothes. Athough it 
was a summer night he felt colder than he had expected and was quite glad when the Doctor wrapped him 
in a robe like his own and gave him a pair of warm, soft buskins for his feet. A moment later, both 
muffled so that they could hardly be seen in the dark corridors, and both shod so that they made almost no 
noise, master and pupil left the room. 
Caspian followed the Doctor through many passages and up several staircases, and at last, through a 
little door in a turret, they came out upon the leads. On one side were the battlements, on the other a steep 
roof; below them, all shadowy and shimmery, the castle gardens; above them, stars and moon. Presently 
they came to another door, which led into the great central tower of the whole castle: Doctor Cornelius 
unlocked it and they began to climb the dark winding stair of the tower. Caspian was becoming excited; 
he had never been allowed up this stair before. 
It was long and steep, but when they came out on the roof of the tower and Caspian had got his breath, 
he felt that it had been well worth it. Away on his right he could see, rather indistinctly, the Western 
Mountains. On his left was the gleam of the Great River, and everything was so quiet that he could hear 
the sound of the waterfall at Beaversdam, a mile away. There was no difficulty in picking out the two 
stars they had come to see. They hung rather low in the southern sky, almost as bright as two little moons 
and very close together. 
"Are they going to have a collision?" he asked in an awestruck voice. 

"Nay, dear Prince," said the Doctor (and he too spoke in a whisper). "The great lords of the upper sky 
know the steps of their dance too well for that. Look well upon them. Their meeting is fortunate and 
means some great good for the sad realm of Narnia. Tarva, the Lord of Victory, salutes Alambil, the Lady 
of Peace. They are just coming to their nearest." 
"It's a pity that tree gets in the way," said Caspian. "We'd really see better from the West Tower, though it 
is not so high." 
Doctor Cornelius said nothing for about two minutes, but stood still with his eyes fixed on Tarva and 
Alambil. Then he drew a deep breath and turned to Caspian. 
"There," he said. "You have seen what no man now alive has seen, nor will see again. And you are right. 
We should have seen it even better from the smaller tower. I brought you here for another reason." 
Caspian looked up at him, but the Doctor's hood concealed most of his face. 
"The virtue of this tower," said Doctor Cornelius, "is that we have six empty rooms beneath us, and a 
long stair, and the door at the bottom of the stair is locked. We cannot be overheard." 
"Are you going to tell me what you wouldn't tell me the other day?" said Caspian. 
"I am," said the Doctor. "But remember. You and I must never talk about these things except here - on 
the very top of the Great Tower." 
"No. That's a promise," said Caspian. "But do go on, please." 
"Listen," said the Doctor. "All you have heard about Old Narnia is true. It is not the land of Men. It is the 
country of Aslan, the country of the Waking Trees and Visible Naiads, of Fauns and Satyrs, of Dwarfs 
and Giants, of the gods and the Centaurs, of Talking Beasts. It was against these that the first Caspian 
fought. It is you Telmarines who silenced the beasts and the trees and the fountains, and who killed and 
drove away the Dwarfs and Fauns, and are now trying to cover up even the memory of them. The King 
does not allow them to be spoken of." 

"Oh, I do wish we hadn't," said Caspian. "And I am glad it was all true, even if it is all over." 
"Many of your race wish that in secret," said Doctor Cornelius. 
"But, Doctor," said Caspian, "why do you say my race? After all, I suppose you're a Telmarine too." 
"Am I?" said the Doctor. 
"Well, you're a Man anyway," said Caspian. 
"Am I?" repeated the Doctor in a deeper voice, at the same moment throwing back his hood so that 
Caspian could see his face clearly in the moonlight. 
All at once Caspian realized the truth and felt that he ought to have realized it long before. Doctor 
Cornelius was so small, and so fat, and had such a very long beard. Two thoughts came into his head at 
the same moment. One was a thought of terror - "He's not a real man, not a man at all, he's a Dwarf, and 
he's brought me up here to kill me." The other was sheer delight - "There are real Dwarfs still, and I've 
seen one at last." 
"So you've guessed it in the end," said Doctor Cornelius. "Or guessed it nearly right. I'm not a pure 
Dwarf. I have human blood in me too. Many Dwarfs escaped in the great battles and lived on, shaving 
their beards and wearing highheeled shoes and pretending to be men. They have mixed with your 
Telmarines. I am one of those, only a halfDwarf, and if any of my kindred, the true Dwarfs, are still alive 
anywhere in the world, doubtless they would despise me and call me a traitor. But never in all these years 
have we forgotten our own people and all the other happy creatures of Narnia, and the long-lost days of 
freedom." 
"I'm - I'm sorry, Doctor," said Caspian. "It wasn't my fault, you know." 

"I am not saying these things in blame of you, dear Prince," answered the Doctor. "You may well ask 
why I say them at all. But I have two reasons. Firstly, because my old heart has carried these secret 
memories so long that it aches with them and would burst if I did not whisper them to you. But secondly, 
for this: that when you become King you may help us, for I know that you also, Telmarine though you 
are, love the Old Things." 
"I do, I do," said Caspian. "But how can I help?" 
"You can be kind to the poor remnants of the Dwarf people, like myself. You can gather learned 
magicians and try to find a way of awaking the trees once more. You can search through all the nooks and 
wild places of the land to see if any Fauns or Talking Beasts or Dwarfs are perhaps still alive in hiding." 
"Do you think there are any?" asked Caspian eagerly. 
"I don't know - I don't know," said the Doctor with a deep sigh. "Sometimes I am afraid there can't be. I 
have been looking for traces of them all my life. Sometimes I have thought I heard a Dwarf-drum in the 
mountains. Sometimes at night, in the woods, I thought I had caught a glimpse of Fauns and Satyrs 
dancing a long way off; but when I came to the place, there was never anything there. I have often 
despaired; but something always happens to start me hoping again. I don't know. But at least you can try 
to be a King like the High King Peter of old, and not like your uncle." 
"Then it's true about the Kings and Queens too, and about the White Witch?" said Caspian. 
"Certainly it is true," said Cornelius. "Their reign was the Golden Age in Narnia and the land has never 
forgotten them." 
"Did they live in this castle, Doctor?" 
"Nay, my dear," said the old man. "This castle is a thing of yesterday. Your great-great-grandfather built 
it. But when the two sons of Adam and the two daughters of Eve were made Kings and Queens of Narnia 
by Aslan himself, they lived in the castle of Cair Paravel. No man alive has seen that blessed place and 
perhaps even the ruins of it have now vanished. But we believe it was far from here, down at the mouth of 
the Great River, on the very shore of the sea." 

"Ugh!" said Caspian with a shudder. "Do you mean in the Black Woods? Where all the - the - you know, 
the ghosts live?" 
"Your Highness speaks as you have been taught," said the Doctor. "But it is all lies. There are no ghosts 
there. That is a story invented by the Telmarines. Your Kings are in deadly fear of the sea because they 
can never quite forget that in all stories Aslan comes from over the sea. They don't want to go near it and 
they don't want anyone else to go near it. So they have let great woods grow up to cut their people off 
from the coast. But because they have quarrelled with the trees they are afraid of the woods. And because 
they are afraid of the woods they imagine that they are full of ghosts. And the Kings and great men, hating 
both the sea and the wood, partly believe these stories, and partly encourage them. They feel safer if no 
one in Narnia dares to go down to the coast and look out to sea towards Aslan's land and the morning and 
the eastern end of the world." 
There was a deep silence between them for a few minutes. Then Doctor Cornelius said, "Come. We have 
been here long enough. It is time to go down and to bed." 
"Must we?" said Caspian. "I'd like to go on talking about these things for hours and hours and hours." 
"Someone might begin looking for us, if we did that," said Doctor Cornelius. 
AFTER this, Caspian and his Tutor had many more secret conversations on the top of the Great Tower, 
and at each conversation Caspian learned more about Old Narnia, so that thinking and dreaming about the 
old days, and longing that they might come back, filled nearly all his spare hours. But of course he had 
not many hours to spare, for now his education was beginning in earnest. He learned sword-fighting and 
riding, swimming and diving, how to shoot with the bow and play on the recorder and the theorbo, how to 

hunt the stag and cut him up when he was dead, besides Cosmography, Rhetoric, Heraldry, Versification, 
and of course History, with a little Law, Physic, Alchemy, and Astronomy. Of Magic he learned only the 
theory, for Doctor Cornelius said the practical part was not proper study for princes. "And I myself," he 
added, "am only a very imperfect magician and can do only the smallest experiments." Of Navigation 
("Which is a noble and heroical art," said the Doctor) he was taught nothing, because King Miraz 
disapproved of ships and the sea. 
He also learned a great deal by using his own eyes and ears. As a little boy he had often wondered why 
he disliked his aunt, Queen Prunaprismia; he now saw that it was because she disliked him. He also began 
to see that Narnia was an unhappy country. The taxes were high and the laws were stern and Miraz was a 
cruel man. 
After some years there came a time when the Queen seemed to be ill and there was a great deal of bustle 
and pother about her in the castle and doctors came and the courtiers whispered. This was in early 
summertime. And one night, while all this fuss was going on, Caspian was unexpectedly wakened by 
Doctor Cornelius after he had been only a few hours in bed. 
"Are we going to do a little Astronomy, Doctor?" said Caspian. 
"Hush!" said the Doctor. "Trust me and do exactly as I tell you. Put on all your clothes; you have a long 
journey before you." 
Caspian was very surprised, but he had learned to have confidence in his Tutor and he began doing what 
he was told at once. When he was dressed the Doctor said, "I have a wallet for you. We must go into the 
next room and fill it with victuals from your Highness's supper table." 
"My gentlemen-in-waiting will be there," said Caspian. 
"They are fast asleep and will not wake," said the Doctor. "I am a very minor magician but I can at least 
contrive a charmed sleep." 
They went into the antechamber and there, sure enough, the two gentlemen-in-waiting were, sprawling 
on chairs and snoring hard. Doctor Cornelius quickly cut up the remains of a cold chicken and some slices 
of venison and put them, with bread and an apple or so and a little flask of good wine, into the wallet 

which he then gave to Caspian. It fitted on by a strap over Caspian's shoulder, like a satchel you would 
use for taking books to school. 
"Have you your sword?" asked the Doctor. 
"Yes," said Caspian. 
"Then put this mantle over all to hide the sword and the wallet. That's right. And now we must go to the 
Great Tower and talk." 
When they had reached the top of the Tower (it was a cloudy night, not at all like the night when they had 
seen the conjunction of Tarva and Alambil) Doctor Cornelius said, 
"Dear Prince, you must leave this castle at once and go to seek your fortune in the wide world. Your life 
is in danger here." 
"Why?" asked Caspian. 
"Because you are the true King of Narnia: Caspian the Tenth, the true son and heir of Caspian the Ninth. 
Long life to your Majesty' - and suddenly, to Caspian's great surprise, the little man dropped down on one 
knee and kissed his hand. 
"What does it all mean? I don't understand," said Caspian. 
"I wonder you have never asked me before," said the Doctor, "why, being the son of King Caspian, you 
are not King Caspian yourself. Everyone except your Majesty knows that Miraz is a usurper. When he 
first began to rule he did not even pretend to be the King: he called himself Lord Protector. But then your 
royal mother died, the good Queen and the only Telmarine who was ever kind to me. And then, one by 
one, all the great lords, who had known your father, died or disappeared. Not by accident, either. Miraz 
weeded them out. Belisar and Uvilas were shot with arrows on a hunting party: by chance, it was 
pretended. All the great house of the Passarids he sent to fight giants on the northern frontier till one by 
one they fell. Arlian and Erimon and a dozen more he executed for treason on a false charge. The two 

brothers of Beaversdam he shut up as madmen. And finally he persuaded the seven noble lords, who 
alone among all the Telmarines did not fear the sea, to sail away and look for new lands beyond the 
Eastern Ocean, and, as he intended, they never came back. And when there was no one left who could 
speak a word for you, then his flatterers (as he had instructed them) begged him to become King. And of 
course he did." 
"Do you mean he now wants to kill me too?" said Caspian. 
"That is almost certain," said Doctor Cornelius. 
"But why now?" said Caspian. "I mean, why didn't he do it long ago if he wanted to? And what harm 
have I done him?" 
"He has changed his mind about you because of something that happened only two hours ago. The Queen 
has had a son." 
"I don't see what that's got to do with it," said Caspian. 
"Don't see!" exclaimed the Doctor. "Have all my lessons in History and Politics taught you no more than 
that? Listen. As long as he had no children of his own, he was willing enough that you should be King 
after he died. He may not have cared much about you, but he would rather you should have the throne 
than a stranger. Now that he has a son of his own he will want his own son to be the next King. You are in 
the way. He'll clear you out of the way." 
"Is he really as bad as that?" said Caspian. "Would he really murder me?" 
"He murdered your Father," said Doctor Cornelius. 
Caspian felt very queer and said nothing. 

"I can tell you the whole story," said the Doctor. "But not now. There is no time. You must fly at once." 
"You'll come with me?" said Caspian. 
"I dare not," said the Doctor. "It would make your danger greater. Two are more easily tracked than one. 
Dear Prince, dear King Caspian, you must be very brave. You must go alone and at once. Try to get 
across the southern border to the court of King Nain of Archenland. He will be good to you." 
"Shall I never see you again?" said Caspian in a quavering voice. 
"I hope so, dear King," said the Doctor. "What friend have I in the wide world except your Majesty? 
And I have a little magic. But in the meantime, speed is everything. Here are two gifts before you go. This 
is a little purse of gold alas, all the treasure in this castle should be your own by rights. And here is 
something far better." 
He put in Caspian's hands something which he could hardly see but which he knew by the feel to be a 
horn. 
"That," said Doctor Cornelius, "is the greatest and most sacred treasure of Narnia. Many terrors I 
endured, many spells did I utter, to find it, when I was still young. It is the magic horn of Queen Susan 
herself which she left behind her when she vanished from Narnia at the end of the Golden Age. It is said 
that whoever blows it shall have strange help - no one can say how strange. It may have the power to call 
Queen Lucy and King Edmund and Queen Susan and High King Peter back from the past, and they will 
set all to rights. It may be that it will call up Asian himself. Take it, King Caspian: but do not use it except 
at your greatest need. And now, haste, haste, haste. The little door at the very bottom of the Tower, the 
door into the garden, is unlocked. There we must part." 
"Can I get my horse Destrier?" said Caspian. 
"He is already saddled and waiting for you just at the corner of the orchard." 
During the long climb down the winding staircase Cornelius whispered many more words of direction 

and advice. Caspian's heart was sinking, but he tried to take it all in. Then came the fresh air in the garden, 
a fervent handclasp with the Doctor, a run across the lawn, a welcoming whinny from Destrier, and so 
King Caspian the Tenth left the castle of his fathers. Looking back, he saw fireworks going up to celebrate 
the birth of the new prince. 
All night he rode southward, choosing by-ways and bridle paths through woods as long as he was in 
country that he knew; but afterwards he kept to the high road. Destrier was as excited as his master at this 
unusual journey, and Caspian, though tears had come into his eyes at saying good-bye to Doctor 
Cornelius, felt brave and, in a way, happy, to think that he was King Caspian riding to seek adventures, 
with his sword on his left hip and Queen Susan's magic horn on his right. But when day came, with a 
sprinkle of rain, and he looked about him and saw on every side unknown woods, wild heaths, and blue 
mountains, he thought how large and strange the world was and felt frightened and small. 
As soon as it was full daylight he left the road and found an open grassy place amid a wood where he 
could rest. He took off Destrier's bridle and let him graze, ate some cold chicken and drank a little wine, 
and presently fell asleep. It was late afternoon when he awoke. He ate a morsel and continued his journey, 
still southward, by many unfrequented lanes. He was now in a land of hills, going up and down, but 
always more up than down. From every ridge he could see the mountains growing bigger and blacker 
ahead. As the evening closed in, he was riding their lower slopes. The wind rose. Soon rain fell in 
torrents. 
Destrier became uneasy; there was thunder in the air. And now they entered a dark and seemingly 
endless pine forest, and all the stories Caspian had ever heard of trees being unfriendly to Man crowded 
into his mind. He remembered that he was, after all, a Telmarine, one of the race who cut down trees 
wherever they could and were at war with all wild things; and though he himself might be unlike other 
Telmarines, the trees could not be expected to know this. 
Nor did they. The wind became a tempest, the woods roared and creaked all round them. There came a 
crash. A tree fell right across the road just behind him. "Quiet, Destrier, quiet!" said Caspian, patting his 
horse's neck; but he was trembling himself and knew that he had escaped death by an inch. Lightning 
flashed and a great crack of thunder seemed to break the sky in two just overhead. 
Destrier bolted in good earnest. Caspian was a good rider, but he had not the strength to hold him back. 
He kept his seat, but he knew that his life hung by a thread during the wild career that followed. Tree after 
tree rose up before them in the dusk and was only just avoided. Then, almost too suddenly to hurt (and yet 
it did hurt him too) something struck Caspian on the forehead and he knew no more. 
When he came to himself he was lying in a firelit place with bruised limbs and a bad headache. Low 

voices were speaking close at hand. 
"And now," said one, "before it wakes up we must decide what to do with it." 
"Kill it," said another. "We can't let it live. It would betray us." 
"We ought to have killed it at once, or else let it alone," said a third voice. "We can't kill it now. Not after 
we've taken it in and bandaged its head and all. It would be murdering a guest." 
"Gentlemen," said Caspian in a feeble voice, "whatever you do to me, I hope you will be kind to my poor 
horse." 
"Your horse had taken flight long before we found you," said the first voice - a curiously husky, earthy 
voice, as Caspian now noticed. 
"Now don't let it talk you round with its pretty words," said the second voice. "I still say-" 
"Horns and halibuts!" exclaimed the third voice. "Of course we're not going to murder it. For shame, 
Nikabrik. What do you say, Trufflehunter? What shall we do with it?" 
"I shall give it a drink," said the first voice, presumably Trufflehunter's. A dark shape approached the 
bed. Caspian felt an arm slipped gently under his shoulders - if it was exactly an arm. The shape somehow 
seemed wrong. The face that bent towards him seemed wrong too. He got the impression that it was very 
hairy and very long nosed, and there were odd white patches on each side of it. "It's a mask of some sort," 
thought Caspian. "Or perhaps I'm in a fever and imagining it all." A cupful of something sweet and hot 
was set to his lips and he drank. At that moment one of the others poked the fire. A blaze sprang up and 
Caspian almost screamed with the shock as the sudden light revealed the face that was looking into his 
own. It was not a man's face but a badger's, though larger and friendlier and more intelligent than the face 
of any badger he had seen before. And it had certainly been talking. He saw, too, that he was on a bed of 
heather, in a cave. By the fire sat two little bearded men, so much wilder and shorter and hairier and 
thicker than Doctor Cornelius that he knew them at once for real Dwarfs, ancient Dwarfs with not a drop 
of human blood in their veins. And Caspian knew that he had found the Old Narnians at last. Then his 
head began to swim again. 

In the next few days he learned to know them by names. The Badger was called Trufflehunter; he was 
the oldest and kindest of the three. The Dwarf who had wanted to kill Caspian was a sour Black Dwarf 
(that is, his hair and beard were black, and thick and hard like horsehair). His name was Nikabrik. The 
other Dwarf was a Red Dwarf with hair rather like a Fox's and he was called Trumpkin. 
"And now," said Nikabrik on the first evening when Caspian was well enough to sit up and talk, "we still 
have to decide what to do with this Human. You two think you've done it a great kindess by not letting me 
kill it. But I suppose the upshot is that we have to keep it a prisoner for life. I'm certainly not going to let 
it go alive - to go back to its own kind and betray us all." 
"Bulbs and bolsters! Nikabrik," said Trumpkin. "Why need you talk so unhandsomely? It isn't the 
creature's fault that it bashed its head against a tree outside our hole. And I don't think it looks like a 
traitor." 
"I say," said Caspian, "you haven't yet found out whether I want to go back. I don't. I want to stay with 
you - if you'll let me. I've been looking for people like you all my life." 
"That's a likely story," growled Nikabrik. "You're a Telmarine and a Human, aren't you? Of course you 
want to go back to your own kind." 
"Well, even if I did, I couldn't," said Caspian. "I was flying for my life when I had my accident. The King 
wants to kill me. If you'd killed me, you'd have done the very thing to please him." 
"Well now," said Trufflehunter, "you don't say so!" 
"Eh?" said Trumpkin. "What's that? What have you been doing, Human, to fall foul of Miraz at your 
age?" 
"He's my uncle," began Caspian, when Nikabrik jumped up with his hand on his dagger. 

"There you are!" he cried. "Not only a Telmarine but close kin and heir to our greatest enemy. Are you 
still mad enough to let this creature live?" He would have stabbed Caspian then and there, if the Badger 
and Trumpkin had not got in the way and forced him back to his seat and held him down. 
"Now, once and for all, Nikabrik," said Trumpkin. "Will you contain yourself, or must Trufflehunter and 
I sit on your head?" 
Nikabrik sulkily promised to behave, and the other two asked Caspian to tell his whole story. When he 
had done so there was a moment's silence. 
"This is the queerest thing I ever heard," said Trumpkin. 
"I don't like it," said Nikabrik. "I didn't know there were stories about us still told among the Humans. 
The less they know about us the better. That old nurse, now. She'd better have held her tongue. And it's all 
mixed up with that Tutor: a renegade Dwarf. I hate 'em. I hate 'em worse than the Humans. You mark my 
words - no good will come of it. 
"Don't you go talking about things you don't understand, Nikabrik," said Trufflehunter. "You Dwarfs are 
as forgetful and changeable as the Humans themselves. I'm a beast, I am, and a Badger what's more. We 
don't change. We hold on. I say great good will come of it. This is the true King of Narnia we've got here: 
a true King, coming back to true Narnia. And we beasts remember, even if Dwarfs forget, that Narnia was 
never right except when a son of Adam was King." 
"Whistles and whirligigs! Trufflehunter," said Trumpkin. "You don't mean you want to give the country 
to Humans?" 
"I said nothing about that," answered the Badger. "It's not Men's country (who should know that better 
than me?) but it's a country for a man to be King of. We badgers have long enough memories to know 
that. Why, bless us all, wasn't the High King Peter a Man?" 
"Do you believe all those old stories?" asked Trumpkin. 

"I tell you, we don't change, we beasts," said Trufflehunter. "We don't forget. I believe in the High King 
Peter and the rest that reigned at Cair Paravel, as firmly as I believe in Aslan himself." 
"As firmly as that, I dare say," said Trumpkin. "But who believes in Aslan nowadays?" 
"I do," said Caspian. "And if I hadn't believed in him before, I would now. Back there among the 
Humans the people who laughed at Aslan would have laughed at stories about Talking Beasts and 
Dwarfs. Sometimes I did wonder if there really was such a person as Aslan: but then sometimes I 
wondered if there were really people like you. Yet there you are." 
"That's right," said Trufflehunter. "You're right, King Caspian. And as long as you will be true to Old 
Narnia you shall be my King, whatever they say. Long life to your Majesty." 
"You make me sick, Badger," growled Nikabrik. "The High King Peter and the rest may have been Men, 
but they were a different sort of Men. This is one of the cursed Telmarines. He has hunted beasts for 
sport. Haven't you, now?" he added, rounding suddenly on Caspian. 
"Well, to tell you the truth, I have," said Caspian. "But they weren't Talking Beasts." 
"It's all the same thing," said Nikabrik. 
"No, no, no," said Trufflehunter. "You know it isn't. You know very well that the beasts in Narnia 
nowadays are different and are no more than the poor dumb, witless creatures you'd find in Calormen or 
Telmar. They're smaller too. They're far more different from us than the half-Dwarfs are from you." 
There was a great deal more talk, but it all ended with the agreement that Caspian should stay and even 
the promise that, as soon as he was able to go out, he should be taken to see what Trumpkin called "the 
Others"; for apparently in these wild parts all sorts of creatures from the Old Days of Narnia still lived on 
in hiding. 

Now began the happiest times that Caspian had ever known. On a fine summer morning when the dew 
lay on the grass he set off with the Badger and the two Dwarfs, up through the forest to a high saddle in 
the mountains and down on to their sunny southern slopes where one looked across the green wolds of 
Archenland. 
"We will go first to the Three Bulgy Bears," said Trumpkin. 
They came in a glade to an old hollow oak tree covered with moss, and Trufflehunter tapped with his 
paw three times on the trunk and there was no answer. Then he tapped again and a woolly sort of voice 
from inside said, "Go away. It's not time to get up yet." But when he tapped the third time there was a 
noise like a small earthquake from inside and a sort of door opened and out came three brown bears, very 
bulgy indeed and blinking their little eyes. And when everything had been explained to them (which took 
a long time because they were so sleepy) they said, just as Trufflehunter had said, that a son of Adam 
ought to be King of Narnia and all kissed Caspian - very wet, snuffly kisses they were - and offered him 
some honey. Caspian did not really want honey, without bread, at that time in the morning, but he thought 
it polite to accept. It took him a long time afterwards to get unsticky. 
After that they went on till they came among tall beech trees and Trufflehunter called out, "Pattertwig! 
Pattertwig! Pattertwig!" and almost at once, bounding down from branch to branch till he was just above 
their heads, came the most magnificent red squirrel that Caspian had ever seen. He was far bigger than the 
ordinary dumb squirrels which he had sometimes seen in the castle gardens; indeed he was nearly the size 
of a terrier and the moment you looked in his face you saw that he could talk. Indeed the difficulty was to 
get him to stop talking, for, like all squirrels, he was a chatterer. He welcomed Caspian at once and asked 
if he would like a nut and Caspian said thanks, he would. But as Pattertwig went bounding away to fetch 
it, Trufflehunter whispered in Caspian's ear, "Don't look. Look the other way. It's very bad manners 
among squirrels to watch anyone going to his store or to look as if you wanted to know where it was." 
Then Pattertwig came back with the nut and Caspian ate it and after that Pattertwig asked if he could take 
any messages to other friends. "For I can go nearly everywhere without setting foot to ground," he said. 
Trufflehunter and the Dwarfs thought this a very good idea and gave Pattertwig messages to all sorts of 
people with queer names telling them all to come to a feast and council on Dancing Lawn at midnight 
three nights ahead. "And you'd better tell the three Bulgies too," added Trumpkin. "We forgot to mention 
it to them." 

Their next visit was to the Seven Brothers of Shuddering Wood. Trumpkin led the way back to the saddle 
and then down eastward on the northern slope of the mountains till they came to a very solemn place 
among rocks and fir trees. They went very quietly and presently Caspian could feel the ground shake 
under his feet as if someone were hammering down below. Trumpkin went to a flat stone about the size of 
the top of a water-butt, and stamped on it with his foot. After a long pause it was moved away by 
someone or something underneath, and there was a dark, round hole with a good deal of heat and steam 
coming out of it and in the middle of the hole the head of a Dwarf very like Trumpkin himself. There was 
a long talk here and the dwarf seemed more suspicious than the Squirrel or the Bulgy Bears had been, but 
in the end the whole party were invited to come down. Caspian found himself descending a dark stairway 
into the earth, but when he came to the bottom he saw firelight. It was the light of a furnace. The whole 
place was a smithy. A subterranean stream ran past on one side of it. Two Dwarfs were at the bellows, 
another was holding a piece of red-hot metal on the anvil with a pair of tongs, a fourth was hammering it, 
and two, wiping their horny little hands on a greasy cloth, were coming forward to meet the visitors. It 
took some time to satisfy them that Caspian was a friend and not an enemy, but when they did, they all 
cried, "Long live the King," and their gifts were noble - mail shirts and helmets and swords for Caspian 
and Trumpkin and Nikabrik. The Badger could have had the same if he had liked, but he said he was a 
beast, he was, and if his claws and teeth could not keep his skin whole, it wasn't worth keeping. The 
workmanship of the arms was far finer than any Caspian had ever seen, and he gladly accepted the Dwarfmade 
sword instead of his own, which looked, in comparison, as feeble as a toy and as clumsy as a stick. 
The seven brothers (who were all Red Dwarfs) promised to come to the feast at Dancing Lawn. 
A little farther on, in a dry, rocky ravine they reached the cave of five Black Dwarfs. They looked 
suspiciously at Caspian, but in the end the eldest of them said, "If he is against Miraz, we'll have him for 
King." And the next oldest said, "Shall we go farther up for you, up to the crags? There's an Ogre or two 
and a Hag that we could introduce you to, up there." 
"Certainly not," said Caspian. 
"I should think not, indeed," said Trufflehunter. "We want none of that sort on our side." Nikabrik 
disagreed with this, but Trumpkin and the Badger overruled him. It gave Caspian a shock to realize that 
the horrible creatures out of the old stories, as well as the nice ones, had some descendants in Narnia still. 
"We should not have Aslan for friend if we brought in that rabble," said Trufflehunter as they came 
away from the cave of the Black Dwarfs. 
"Oh, Aslan!" said Trumpkin, cheerily but contemptuously. "What matters much more is that you 
wouldn't have me." 

"Do you believe in Aslan?" said Caspian to Nikabrik. 
"I'll believe in anyone or anything," said Nikabrik, "that'll batter these cursed Telmarine barbarians to 
pieces or drive them out of Narnia. Anyone or anything, Aslan or the White Witch, do you understand?" 
"Silence, silence," said Trufflehunter. "You do not know what you are saying. She was a worse enemy 
than Miraz and all his race." 
"Not to Dwarfs, she wasn't," said Nikabrik. 
Their next visit was a pleasanter one. As they came lower down, the mountains opened out into a great 
glen or wooded gorge with a swift river running at the bottom. The open places near the river's edge were 
a mass of foxgloves and wild roses and the air was buzzing with bees. Here Trufflehunter called again, 
"Glenstorm! Glenstorm!" and after a pause Caspian heard the sound of hoofs. It grew louder till the valley 
trembled and at last, breaking and trampling the thickets, there came in sight the noblest creatures that 
Caspian had yet seen, the great Centaur Glenstorm and his three sons. His flanks were glossy chestnut and 
the beard that covered his broad chest was goldenred. He was a prophet and a star-gazer and knew what 
they had come about. 
"Long live the King," he cried. "I and my sons are ready for war. When is the battle to be joined?" 
Up till now neither Caspian nor the others had really been thinking of a war. They had some vague idea, 
perhaps, of an occasional raid on some Human farmstead or of attacking a party of hunters, if it ventured 
too far into these southern wilds. But, in the main, they had thought only of living to themselves in woods 
and caves and building up an attempt at Old Narnia in hiding. As soon as Glenstorm had spoken everyone 
felt much more serious. 
"Do you mean a real war to drive Miraz out of Narnia?" asked Caspian. 
"What else?" said the Centaur. "Why else does your Majesty go clad in mail and girt with sword?" 

"Is it possible, Glenstorm?" said the Badger. 
"The time is ripe," said Glenstorm. "I watch the skies, Badger, for it is mine to watch, as it is yours to 
remember. Tarva and Alambil have met in the halls of high heaven, and on earth a son of Adam has once 
more arisen to rule and name the creatures. The hour has struck. Our council at the Dancing Lawn must 
be a council of war." He spoke in such a voice that neither Caspian nor the others hesitated for a moment: 
it now seemed to them quite possible that they might win a war and quite certain that they must wage one. 
As it was now past the middle of the day, they rested with the Centaurs and ate such food as the centaurs 
provided cakes of oaten meal, and apples, and herbs, and wine, and cheese. 
The next place they were to visit was quite near at hand, but they had to go a long way round in order to 
avoid a region in which Men lived. It was well into the afternoon before they found themselves in level 
fields, warm between hedgerows. There Trufflehunter called at the mouth of a little hole in a green bank 
and out popped the last thing Caspian expected - a Talking Mouse. He was of course bigger than a 
common mouse, well over a foot high when he stood on his hind legs, and with ears nearly as long as 
(though broader than) a rabbit's. His name was Reepicheep and he was a gay and martial mouse. He wore 
a tiny little rapier at his side and twirled his long whiskers as if they were a moustache. "There are twelve 
of us, Sire," he said with a dashing and graceful bow, "and I place all the resources of my people 
unreservedly at your Majesty's disposal." Caspian tried hard (and successfully) not to laugh, but he 
couldn't help thinking that Reepicheep and all his people could very easily be put in a washing basket and 
carried home on one's back. 
It would take too long to mention all the creatures whom Caspian met that day - Clodsley Shovel the 
Mole, the three Hardbiters (who were badgers like Trufflehunter), Camillo the Hare, and Hogglestock the 
Hedgehog. They rested at last beside a well at the edge of a wide and level circle of grass, bordered with 
tall elms which now threw long shadows across it, for the sun was setting, the daisies closing, and the 
rooks flying home to bed. Here they supped on food they had brought with them and Trumpkin lit his 
pipe (Nikabrik was not a smoker). 
"Now," said the Badger, "if only we could wake the spirits of these trees and this well, we should have 
done a good day's work." 
"Can't we?" said Caspian. 

"No," said Trufflehunter. "We have no power over them. Since the Humans came into the land, felling 
forests and defiling streams, the Dryads and Naiads have sunk into a deep sleep. Who knows if ever they 
will stir again? And that is a great loss to our side. The Telmarines are horribly afraid of the woods, and 
once the Trees moved in anger, our enemies would go mad with fright and be chased out of Narnia as 
quick as their legs could carry them." 
"What imaginations you Animals have!" said Trumpkin, who didn't believe in such things. "But why stop 
at Trees and Waters? Wouldn't it be even nicer if the stones started throwing themselves at old Miraz?" 
The Badger only grunted at this, and after that there was such a silence that Caspian had nearly dropped 
off to sleep when he thought he heard a faint musical sound from the depth of the woods at his back. Then 
he thought it was only a dream and turned over again; but as soon as his ear touched the ground he felt or 
heard (it was hard to tell which) a faint beating or drumming. He raised his head. The beating noise at 
once became fainter, but the music returned, clearer this time. It was like flutes. He saw that Trufflehunter 
was sitting up staring into the wood. The moon was bright; Caspian had been asleep longer than he 
thought. Nearer and nearer came the music, a tune wild and yet dreamy, and the noise of many light feet, 
till at last, out from the wood into the moonlight, came dancing shapes such as Caspian had been thinking 
of all his life. They were not much taller than dwarfs, but far slighter and more graceful. Their curly heads 
had little horns, the upper part of their bodies gleamed naked in the pale light, but their legs and feet were 
those of goats. 
"Fauns!" cried Caspian, jumping up, and in a moment they were all round him. It took next to no time to 
explain the whole situation to them and they accepted Caspian at once. Before he knew what he was 
doing he found himself joining in the dance. Trumpkin, with heavier and jerkier movements, did likewise 
and even Trufflehunter hopped and lumbered about as best he could. Only Nikabrik stayed where he was, 
looking on in silence. The Fauns footed it all round Caspian to their reedy pipes. Their strange faces, 
which seemed mournful and merry all at once, looked into his; dozens of Fauns, Mentius and Obentinus 
and Dumnus, Voluns, Voltinus, Girbius, Nimienus, Nausus, and Oscuns. Pattertwig had sent them all. 
When Caspian awoke next morning he could hardly believe that it had not all been a dream; but the 
grass was covered with little cloven hoof-marks. 

THE place where they had met the Fauns was, of course, Dancing Lawn itself, and here Caspian and his 
friends remained till the night of the great Council. To sleep under the stars, to drink nothing but well 
water and to live chiefly on nuts and wild fruit, was a strange experience for Caspian after his bed with 
silken sheets in a tapestried chamber at the castle, with meals laid out on gold and silver dishes in the 
anteroom, and attendants ready at his call. But he had never enjoyed himself more. Never had sleep been 
more refreshing nor food tasted more savoury, and he began already to harden and his face wore a 
kinglier look. 
When the great night came, and his various strange subjects came stealing into the lawn by ones and 
twos and threes or by sixes and sevens - the moon then shining almost at her full - his heart swelled as he 
saw their numbers and heard their greetings. All whom he had met were there: Bulgy Bears and Red 
Dwarfs and Black Dwarfs, Moles and Badgers, Hares and Hedgehogs, and others whom he had not yet 
seen - five Satyrs as red as foxes, the whole contingent of Talking Mice, armed to the teeth and following 
a shrill trumpet, some Owls, the Old Raven of Ravenscaur. Last of all (and this took Caspian's breath 
away), with the Centaurs came a small but genuine Giant, Wimbleweather of Deadman's Hill, carrying on 
his back a basketful of rather sea-sick Dwarfs who had accepted his offer of a lift and were now wishing 
they had walked instead. 
The Bulgy Bears were very anxious to have the feast first and leave the council till afterwards: perhaps 
till tomorrow. Reepicheep and his Mice said that councils and feasts could both wait, and proposed 
storming Miraz in his own castle that very night. Pattertwig and the other Squirrels said they could talk 
and eat at the same time, so why not have the council and feast all at once? The Moles proposed throwing 
up entrenchments round the Lawn before they did anything else. The Fauns thought it would be better to 
begin with a solemn dance. The Old Raven, while agreeing with the Bears that it would take too long to 
have a full council before supper, begged to be allowed to give a brief address to the whole company. But 
Caspian and the Centaurs and the Dwarfs overruled all these suggestions and insisted on holding a real 
council of war at once. 
When all the other creatures had been persuaded to sit down quietly in a great circle, and when (with 
more difficulty) they had got Pattertwig to stop running to and fro and saying "Silence! Silence, everyone, 
for the King's speech", Caspian, feeling a little nervous, got up. "Narnians!" he began, but he never got 
any further, for at that very moment Camillo the Hare said, "Hush! There's a Man somewhere near." 
They were all creatures of the wild, accustomed to being hunted, and they all became still as statues. The 
beasts all turned their noses in the direction which Camillo had indicated. 

"Smells like Man and yet not quite like Man," whispered Trufflehunter. 
"It's getting steadily nearer," said Camillo. 
"Two badgers and you three Dwarfs, with your bows at the - ready, go softly off to meet it," said 
Caspian. 
"We'll settle 'un," said a Black Dwarf grimly, fitting a shaft to his bowstring. 
"Don't shoot if it is alone," said Caspian. "Catch it." 
"Why?" asked the Dwarf. 
"Do as you're told," said Glenstorm the Centaur. 
Everyone waited in silence while the three Dwarfs and two Badgers trotted stealthily across to the trees 
on the northwest side of the Lawn. Then came a sharp dwarfish cry, "Stop! Who goes there?" and a 
sudden spring. A moment later a voice, which Caspian knew well, could he heard saying, "All right, all 
right, I'm unarmed. Take my wrists if you like, worthy Badgers, but don't bite right through them. I want 
to speak to the King." 
"Doctor Cornelius!" cried Caspian with joy, and rushed forward to greet his old tutor. Everyone else 
crowded round. 
"Pah!" said Nikabrik. "A renegade Dwarf. A half-and-halfer! Shall I pass my sword through its throat?" 
"Be quiet, Nikabrik," said Trumpkin. "The creature can't help its ancestry." 

"This is my greatest friend and the saviour of my life," said Caspian. "And anyone who doesn't like his 
company may leave my army: at once. Dearest doctor, I am glad to see you again. How ever did you find 
us out?" 
"By a little use of simple magic, your Majesty," said the Doctor, who was still puffing and blowing from 
having walked so fast. "But there's no time to go into that now. We must all fly from this place at once. 
You are already betrayed and Miraz is on the move. Before midday tomorrow you will be surrounded." 
"Betrayed!" said Caspian. "And by whom?" 
"Another renegade Dwarf, no doubt," said Nikabrik. 
"By your horse Destrier," said Doctor Cornelius. "The poor brute knew no better. When you were 
knocked off, of course, he went dawdling back to his stable in the castle. Then the secret of your flight 
was known. I made myself scarce, having no wish to be questioned about it in Miraz's torture chamber. I 
had a pretty good guess from my crystal as to where I should find you. But all day - that was the day 
before yesterday - I saw Miraz's tracking parties out in the woods. Yesterday I learned that his army is 
out. I don't think some of your - um - pure-blooded Dwarfs have as much woodcraft as might be expected. 
You've left tracks all over the place. Great carelessness. At any rate something has warned Miraz that Old 
Narnia is not so dead as he had hoped, and he is on the move." 
"Hurrah!" said a very shrill and small voice from somewhere at the Doctor's feet. "Let them come! All I 
ask is that the King will put me and my people in the front." 
"What on earth?" said Doctor Cornelius. "Has your Majesty got grasshoppers - or mosquitoes - in your 
army?" Then after stooping down and peering carefully through his spectacles, he broke into a laugh. 
"By the Lion," he swore, "it's a mouse. Signior Mouse, I desire your better acquaintance. I am honoured 
by meeting so valiant a beast." 
"My friendship you shall have, learned Man," piped Reepicheep. "And any Dwarf - or Giant - in the 
army who does not give you good language shall have my sword to reckon with." 

"Is there time for this foolery?" asked Nikabrik. "What are our plans? Battle or flight?" 
"Battle if need be," said Trumpkin. "But we are hardly ready for it yet, and this is no very defensible 
place." 
"I don't like the idea of running away," said Caspian. 
"Hear him! Hear him!" said the Bulgy Bears. "Whatever we do, don't let's have any running. Especially 
not before supper; and not too soon after it neither." 
"Those who run first do not always run last," said the Centaur. "And why should we let the enemy choose 
our position instead of choosing it ourselves? Let us find a strong place." 
"That's wise, your Majesty, that's wise," said Trufflehunter. 
"But where are we to go?" asked several voices. 
"Your Majesty," said Doctor Cornelius, "and all you variety of creatures, I think we must fly east and 
down the river to the great woods. The Telmarines hate that region. They have always been afraid of the 
sea and of something that may come over the sea. That is why they have let the great woods grow up. If 
traditions speak true, the ancient Cair Paravel was at the river-mouth. All that part is friendly to us and 
hateful to our enemies. We must go to Aslan's How." 
"Aslan's How?" said several voices. "We do not know what it is." 
"It lies within the skirts of the Great Woods and it is a huge mound which Narnians raised in very ancient 
times over a very magical place, where there stood - and perhaps still stands - a very magical Stone. The 
Mound is all hollowed out within into galleries and caves, and the Stone is in the central cave of all. There 
is room in the mound for all our stores, and those of us who have most need of cover and are most 
accustomed to underground life can be lodged in the caves. The rest of us can lie in the wood. At a pinch 

all of us (except this worthy Giant) could retreat into the Mound itself, and there we should be beyond the 
reach of every danger except famine." 
"It is a good thing we have a learned man among us," said Trufflehunter; but Trumpkin muttered under 
his breath, "Soup and celery! I wish our leaders would think less about these old wives' tales and more 
about victuals and arms." But all approved of Cornelius's proposal and that very night, half an hour later, 
they were on the march. Before sunrise they arrived at Aslan's How. 
It was certainly an awesome place, a round green hill on top of another hill, long since grown over with 
trees, and one little, low doorway leading into it. The tunnels inside were a perfect maze till you got to 
know them, and they were lined and roofed with smooth stones, and on the stones, peering in the twilight, 
Caspian saw strange characters and snaky patterns, and pictures in which the form of a Lion was repeated 
again and again. It all seemed to belong to an even older Narnia than the Narnia of which his nurse had 
told him. 
It was after they had taken up their quarters in and around the How that fortune began to turn against 
them. King Miraz's scouts soon found their new lair, and he and his army arrived on the edge of the 
woods. And as so often happens, the enemy turned out stronger than they had reckoned. Caspian's heart 
sank as he saw company after company arriving. And though Miraz's men may have been afraid of going 
into the wood, they were even more afraid of Miraz, and with him in command they carried battle deeply 
into it and sometimes almost to the How itself. Caspian and other captains of course made many sorties 
into the open country. Thus there was fighting on most days and sometimes by night as well; but 
Caspian's party had on the whole the worst of it. 
At last there came a night when everything had gone as badly as possible, and the rain which had been 
falling heavily all day had ceased at nightfall only to give place to raw cold. That morning Caspian had 
arranged what was his biggest battle yet, and all had hung their hopes on it. He, with most of the Dwarfs, 
was to have fallen on the King's right wing at daybreak, and then, when they were heavily engaged, Giant 
Wimbleweather, with the Centaurs and some of the fiercest beasts, was to have broken out from another 
place and endeavoured to cut the King's right off from the rest of the army. But it had all failed. No one 
had warned Caspian (because no one in these later days of 
Narnia remembered) that Giants are not at all clever. Poor Wimbleweather, though as brave as a lion, was 
a true Giant in that respect. He had broken out at the wrong time and from the wrong place, and both his 
party and Caspian's had suffered badly and done the enemy little harm. The best of the Bears had been 
hurt, a Centaur terribly wounded, and there were few in Caspian's party who had not lost blood. It was a 
gloomy company that huddled under the dripping trees to eat their scanty supper. 

The gloomiest of all was Giant Wimbleweather. He knew it was all his fault. He sat in silence shedding 
big tears which collected on the end of his nose and then fell off with a huge splash on the whole bivouac 
of the Mice, who had just been beginning to get warm and drowsy. They all jumped up, shaking the water 
out of their ears and wringing their little blankets, and asked the Giant in shrill but forcible voices whether 
he thought they weren't wet enough without this sort of thing. And then other people woke up and told the 
Mice they had been enrolled as scouts and not as a concert party, and asked why they couldn't keep quiet. 
And Wimbleweather tiptoed away to find some place where he could be miserable in peace and stepped 
on somebody's tail and somebody (they said afterwards it was a fox) bit him. And so everyone was out of 
temper. 
But in the secret and magical chamber at the heart of the How, King Caspian, with Cornelius and the 
Badger and Nikabrik and Trumpkin, were at council. Thick pillars of ancient workmanship supported the 
roof. In the centre was the Stone itself - a stone table, split right down the centre, and covered with what 
had once been writing of some kind: but ages of wind and rain and snow had almost worn them away in 
old times when the Stone Table had stood on the hilltop, and the Mound had not yet been built above it. 
They were not using the Table nor sitting round it: it was too magic a thing for any common use. They sat 
on logs a little way from it, and between them was a rough wooden table, on which stood a rude clay lamp 
lighting up their pale faces and throwing big shadows on the walls. 
"If your Majesty is ever to use the Horn," said Trufflehunter, "I think the time has now come." Caspian 
had of course told them of his treasure several days ago. 
"We are certainly in great need," answered Caspian. "But it is hard to be sure we are at our greatest. 
Supposing there came an even worse need and we had already used it?" 
"By that argument," said Nikabrik, "your Majesty will never use it until it is too late." 
"I agree with that," said Doctor Cornelius. 
"And what do you think, Trumpkin?" asked Caspian. 
"Oh, as for me," said the Red Dwarf, who had been listening with complete indifference, "your Majesty 
knows I think the Horn - and that bit of broken stone over there and your great King Peter - and your Lion 
Aslan - are all eggs in moonshine. It's all one to me when your Majesty blows the Horn. All I insist on is 
that the army is told nothing about it. There's no good raising hopes of magical help which (as I think) are 
sure to be disappointed." 

"Then in the name of Aslan we will wind Queen Susan's Horn," said Caspian. 
"There is one thing, Sire," said Doctor Cornelius, "that should perhaps be done first. We do not know 
what form the help will take. It might call Aslan himself from oversea. But I think it is more likely to call 
Peter the High King and his mighty consorts down from the high past. But in either case, I do not think 
we can be sure that the help will come to this very spot -" 
"You never said a truer word," put in Trumpkin. 
"I think," went on the learned man, "that they - or he will come back to one or other of the Ancient 
Places of Narnia. This, where we now sit, is the most ancient and most deeply magical of all, and here, I 
think, the answer is likeliest to come. But there are two others. One Lantern Waste, up-river, west of 
Beaversdam, where the Royal Children first appeared in Narnia, as the records tell The other is down at 
the river-mouth, where their castle of Cair Paravel once stood. And if Aslan himself comes, that would be 
the best place for meeting him too, for every story says that he is the son of the great Emperor-over-the- 
Sea, and over the sea he will pass. I should like very much to send messengers to both places, to Lantern 
Waste and the river-mouth, to receive them - or him or it." 
"Just as I thought," muttered Trumpkin. "The first result of all this foolery is not to bring us help but to 
lose us two fighters." 
"Who would you think of sending, Doctor Cornelius?" asked Caspian. 
"Squirrels are best for getting through enemy country without being caught," said Trufflehunter. 
"All our squirrels (and we haven't many)," said Nikabrik, "are rather flighty. The only one I'd trust on a 
job like that would be Pattertwig." 
"Let it be Pattertwig, then," said King Caspian. "And who for our other messenger? I know you'd go, 
Trufflehunter, but you haven't the speed. Nor you, Doctor Cornelius." 

"I won't go," said Nikabrik. "With all these Humans and beasts about, there must be a Dwarf here to see 
that the Dwarfs are fairly treated." 
"Thimbles and thunderstorms!" cried Trumpkin in a rage. "Is that how you speak to the King? Send me, 
Sire, I'll go." 
"But I thought you didn't believe in the Horn, Trumpkin," said Caspian. 
"No more I do, your Majesty. But what's that got to do with it? I might as well die on a wild goose chase 
as die here. You are my King. I know the difference between giving advice and taking orders. You've had 
my advice, and now it's the time for orders." 
"I will never forget this, Trumpkin," said Caspian. "Send for Pattertwig, one of you. And when shall I 
blow the Horn?" 
"I would wait for sunrise, your Majesty," said Doctor Cornelius. "That sometimes has an effect in 
operations of White Magic." 
A few minutes later Pattertwig arrived and had his task explained to him. As he was, like many squirrels, 
full of courage and dash and energy and excitement and mischief (not to say conceit), he no sooner heard 
it than he was eager to be off. It was arranged that he should run for Lantern Waste while Trumpkin made 
the shorter journey to the river-mouth. After a hasty meal they both set off with the fervent thanks and 
good wishes of the King, the Badger, and Cornelius. 

"AND so," said Trumpkin (for, as you have realized, it was he who had been telling all this story to the 
four children, sitting on the grass in the ruined hall of Cair Paravel) - "and so I put a crust or two in my 
pocket, left behind all weapons but my dagger, and took to the woods in the grey of the morning. I'd been 
plugging away for many hours when there came a sound that I'd never heard the like of in my born days. 
Eh, I won't forget that. The whole air was full of it, loud as thunder but far longer, cool and sweet as 
music over water, but strong enough to shake the woods. And I said to myself, `If that's not the Horn, call 
me a rabbit.' And a moment later I wondered why he hadn't blown it sooner-" 
"What time was it?" asked Edmund. 
"Between nine and ten of the clock," said Trumpkin. 
"Just when we were at the railway station!" said all the children, and looked at one another with shining 
eyes. 
"Please go on," said Lucy to the Dwarf. 
"Well, as I was saying, I wondered, but I went on as hard as I could pelt. I kept on all night - and then, 
when it was half light this morning, as if I'd no more sense than a Giant, I risked a short cut across open 
country to cut off a big loop of the river, and was caught. Not by the army, but by a pompous old fool 
who has charge of a little castle which is Miraz's last stronghold towards the coast. I needn't tell you they 
got no true tale out of me, but I was a Dwarf and that was enough. But, lobsters and lollipops! it is a good 
thing the seneschal was a pompous fool. Anyone else would have run me through there and then. But 
nothing would do for him short of a grand execution: sending me down `to the ghosts in the full 
ceremonial way. And then this young lady", (he nodded at Susan) "does her bit of archery and it was 
pretty shooting, let me tell you - and here we are. And without my armour, for of course they took that." 
He knocked out and refilled his pipe. 
"Great Scott!" said Peter. "So it was the horn - your own horn, Su - that dragged us all off that seat on 
the platform yesterday morning! I can hardly believe it; yet it all fits in." 
"I don't know why you shouldn't believe it," said Lucy, "if you believe in magic at all. Aren't there lots of 
stories about magic forcing people out of one place - out of one world - into another? I mean, when a 

magician in The Arabian Nights calls up a Jinn, it has to come. We had to come, just like that." 
"Yes," said Peter, "I suppose what makes it feel so queer is that in the stories it's always someone in our 
world who does the calling. One doesn't really think about where the Jinn's coming from." 
"And now we know what it feels like for the Jinn," said Edmund with a chuckle. "Golly! It's a bit 
uncomfortable to know that we can be whistled for like that. It's worse than what Father says about living 
at the mercy of the telephone." 
"But we want to be here, don't we," said Lucy, "if Aslan wants us?" 
"Meanwhile," said the Dwarf, "what are we to do? I suppose I'd better go back to King Caspian and tell 
him no help has come." 
"No help?" said Susan. "But it has worked. And here we are." 
"Um - um - yes, to be sure. I see that," said the Dwarf, whose pipe seemed to be blocked (at any rate he 
made himself very busy cleaning it). "But- well - I mean -" 
"But don't you yet see who we are?" shouted Lucy. "You are stupid." 
"I suppose you are the four children out of the old stories," said Trumpkin. "And I'm very glad to meet 
you of course. And it's very interesting, no doubt. But - no offence?'- and he hesitated again. 
"Do get on and say whatever you're going to say," said Edmund. 
"Well, then - no offence," said Trumpkin. "But, you know, the King and Trufflehunter and Doctor 
Cornelius were expecting - well, if you see what I mean, help. To put it in another way, I think they'd 
been imagining you as great warriors. As it is - we're awfully fond of children and all that, but just at the 
moment, in the middle of a war but I'm sure you understand." 

"You mean you think we're no good," said Edmund, getting red in the face. 
"Now pray don't be offended," interrupted the Dwarf. "I assure you, my dear little friends-" 
"Little from you is really a bit too much," said Edmund, jumping up. "I suppose you don't believe we 
won the Battle of Beruna? Well, you can say what you like about me because I know -" 
"There's no good losing our tempers," said Peter. "Let's fit him out with fresh armour and fit ourselves 
out from the treasure chamber, and have a talk after that." 
"I don't quite see the point -" began Edmund, but Lucy whispered in his ear, "Hadn't we better do what 
Peter says? He is the High King, you know. And I think he has an idea." So Edmund agreed and by the 
aid of his torch they all, including Trumpkin, went down the steps again into the dark coldness and dusty 
splendour of the treasure house. 
The Dwarf's eyes glistened as he saw the wealth that lay on the shelves (though he had to stand on 
tiptoes to do so) and he muttered to himself, "It would never do to let Nikabrik see this; never." They 
found easily enough a mail shirt for him, a sword, a helmet, a shield, a bow and quiverful of arrows, all of 
dwarfish size. The helmet was of copper, set with rubies, and there was gold on the hilt of the sword: 
Trumpkin had never seen, much less carried, so much wealth in all his life. The children also put on mail 
shirts and helmets; a sword and shield were found for Edmund and a bow for Lucy - Peter and Susan were 
of course already carrying their gifts. As they came back up the stairway, jingling in their mail, and 
already looking and feeling more like Narnians and less like schoolchildren, the two boys were behind, 
apparently making some plan. Lucy heard Edmund say, "No, let me do it. It will be more of a sucks for 
him if I win, and less of a let-down for us all if I fail." 
"All right, Ed," said Peter. 
When they came out into the daylight Edmund turned to the Dwarf very politely and said, "I've got 
something to ask you. Kids like us don't often have the chance of meeting a great warrior like you. Would 
you have a little fencing match with me? It would be frightfully decent." 

"But, lad," said Trumpkin, "these swords are sharp." 
"I know," said Edmund. "But I'll never get anywhere near you and you'll be quite clever enough to 
disarm me without doing me any damage." 
"It's a dangerous game," said Trumpkin. "But since you make such a point of it, I'll try a pass or two." 
Both swords were out in a moment and the three others jumped off the dais and stood watching. It was 
well worth it. It was not like the silly fighting you see with broad swords on the stage. It was not even like 
the rapier fighting which you sometimes see rather better done. This was real broad-sword fighting. The 
great thing is to slash at your enemy's legs and feet because they are the part that have no armour. And 
when he slashes at yours you jump with both feet off the ground so that his blow goes under them. This 
gave the Dwarf an advantage because Edmund, being much taller, had to be always stooping. I don't think 
Edmund would have had a chance if he had fought Trumpkin twenty-four hours earlier. But the air of 
Narnia had been working upon him ever since they arrived on the island, and all his old battles came back 
to him, and his arms and fingers remembered their old skill. He was King Edmund once more. Round and 
round the two combatants circled, stroke after stroke they gave, and Susan (who never could learn to like 
this sort of thing) shouted out, "Oh, do be careful." And then, so quickly that no one (unless they knew, as 
Peter did) could quite see how it happened, Edmund flashed his sword round with a peculiar twist, the 
Dwarf's sword flew out of his grip, and Trumpkin was wringing his empty hand as you do after a "sting" 
from a cricket-bat. 
"Not hurt, I hope, my dear little friend?" said Edmund, panting a little and returning his own sword to its 
sheath. 
"I see the point," said Trumpkin drily. "You know a trick I never learned." 
"That's quite true," put in Peter. "The best swordsman in the world may be disarmed by a trick that's new 
to him. I think it's only fair to give Trumpkin a chance at something else. Will you have a shooting match 
with my sister? There are no tricks in archery, you know." 
"Ah, you're jokers, you are," said the Dwarf. "I begin to see. As if I didn't know how she can shoot, after 
what happened this morning. All the same, I'll have a try." He spoke gruffly, but his eyes brightened, for 
he was a famous bowman among his own people. 

All five of them came out into the courtyard. 
"What's to be the target?" asked Peter. 
"I think that apple hanging over the wall on the branch there would do," said Susan. 
"That'll do nicely, lass," said Trumpkin. "You mean the yellow one near the middle of the arch?" 
"No, not that," said Susan. "The red one up above - over the battlement." 
The Dwarf's face fell. "Looks more like a cherry than an apple," he muttered, but he said nothing out 
loud. 
They tossed up for first shot (greatly to the interest of Trumpkin, who had never seen a coin tossed 
before) and Susan lost. They were to shoot from the top of the steps that led from the hall into the 
courtyard. Everyone could see from the way the Dwarf took his position and handled his bow that he 
knew what he was about. 
Twang went the string. It was an excellent shot. The tiny apple shook as the arrow passed, and a leaf 
came fluttering down. Then Susan went to the top of the steps and strung her bow. She was not enjoying 
her match half so much as Edmund had enjoyed his; not because she had any doubt about hitting the apple 
but because Susan was so tenderhearted that she almost hated to beat someone who had been beaten 
already. The Dwarf watched her keenly as she drew the shaft to her ear. A moment later, with a little soft 
thump which they could all hear in that quiet place, the apple fell to the grass with Susan's arrow in it. 
"Oh, well done, Su, " shouted the other children. 
"It wasn't really any better than yours," said Susan to the Dwarf. "I think there was a tiny breath of wind 
as you shot." 

"No, there wasn't," said Trumpkin. "Don't tell me. I know when I am fairly beaten. I won't even say that 
the scar of my last wound catches me a bit when I get my arm well back -" 
"Oh, are you wounded?" asked Lucy. "Do let me look." 
"It's not a sight for little girls," began Trumpkin, but then he suddenly checked himself. "There I go 
talking like a fool again," he said "I suppose you're as likely to be a great surgeon as your brother was to 
be a great swordsman or your sister to be a great archer." He sat down on the steps and took off his 
hauberk and slipped down his little shirt, showing an arm hairy and muscular (in proportion) as a sailor's 
though not much bigger than a child's. There was a clumsy bandage on the shoulder which Lucy 
proceeded to unroll. Underneath, the cut looked very nasty and there was a good deal of swelling. "Oh, 
poor Trumpkin," said Lucy. "How horrid." Then she carefully dripped on to it one single drop of the 
cordial from her flask. 
"Hullo. Eh? What have you done?" said Trumpkin. But however he turned his head and squinted and 
whisked his beard to and fro, he couldn't quite see his own shoulder. Then he felt it as well as he could, 
getting his arms and fingers into very difficult positions as you do when you're trying to scratch a place 
that is just out of reach. Then he swung his arm and raised it and tried the muscles, and finally jumped to 
his feet crying, "Giants and junipers! It's cured! It's as good as new." After that he burst into a great laugh 
and said, "Well, I've made as big a fool of myself as ever a Dwarf did. No offence, I hope? My humble 
duty to your Majesties all -humble duty. And thanks for my life, my cure, my breakfast - and my lesson." 
The children all said it was quite all right and not to mention it. 
"And now," said Peter, "if you've really decided to believe in us-" 
"I have," said the Dwarf. 
"It's quite clear what we have to do. We must join King Caspian at once." 
"The sooner the better," said Trumpkin. "My being such a fool has already wasted about an hour." 

"It's about two days' journey, the way you came," said Peter. "For us, I mean. We can't walk all day and 
night like you Dwarfs." Then he turned to the others. "What Trumpkin calls Aslan's How is obviously the 
Stone Table itself. You remember it was about half a day's march, or a little less, from there down to the 
Fords of Beruna -" 
"Beruna's Bridge, we call it," said Trumpkin. 
"There was no bridge in our time," said Peter. "And then from Beruna down to here was another day and 
a bit. We used to get home about teatime on the second day, going easily. Going hard, we could do the 
whole thing in a day and a half perhaps." 
"But remember it's all woods now," said Trumpkin, "and there are enemies to dodge." 
"Look here," said Edmund, "need we go by the same way that Our Dear Little Friend came?" 
"No more of that, your Majesty, if you love me," said the Dwarf. 
"Very well," said Edmund. "May I say our D.L.F.?" 
"Oh, Edmund," said Susan. "Don't keep on at him like that." 
"That's all right, lass - I mean your Majesty," said Trumpkin with a chuckle. "A jibe won't raise a blister." 
(And after that they often called him the D.L.F. till they'd almost forgotten what it meant.) 
"As I was saying," continued Edmund, "we needn't go that way. Why shouldn't we row a little south till 
we come to Glasswater Creek and row up it? That brings us up behind the Hill of the Stone Table, and 
we'll be safe while we're at sea. If we start at once, we can be at the head of Glasswater before dark, get a 
few hours' sleep, and be with Caspian pretty early tomorrow." 

"What a thing it is to know the coast," said Trumpkin. "None of us know anything about Glasswater." 
"What about food?" asked Susan. 
"Oh, we'll have to do with apples," said Lucy. "Do let's get on. We've done nothing yet, and we've been 
here nearly two days." 
"And anyway, no one's going to have my hat for a fishbasket again," said Edmund. 
They used one of the raincoats as a kind of bag and put a good many apples in it. Then they all had a 
good long drink at the well (for they would meet no more fresh water till they landed at the head of the 
Creek) and went down to the boat. The children were sorry to leave Cair Paravel, which, even in ruins, 
had begun to feel like home again. 
"The D.L.F. had better steer," said Peter, "and Ed and I will take an oar each. Half a moment, though. 
We'd better take off our mail: we're going to be pretty warm before we're done. The girls had better be in 
the bows and shout directions to the D.L.F. because he doesn't know the way. You'd better get us a fair 
way out to sea till we've passed the island." 
And soon the green, wooded coast of the island was falling away behind them, and its little bays and 
headlands were beginning to look flatter, and the boat was rising and falling in the gentle swell. The sea 
began to grow bigger around them and, in the distance, bluer, but close round the boat it was green and 
bubbly. Everything smelled salt and there was no noise except the swishing of water and the clop-clop of 
water against the sides and the splash of the oars and the jolting noise of the rowlocks. The sun grew hot. 
It was delightful for Lucy and Susan in the bows, bending over the edge and trying to get their hands in 
the sea which they could never quite reach. The bottom, mostly pure, pale sand but with occasional 
patches of purple seaweed, could be seen beneath them. 
"It's like old times," said Lucy. "Do you remember our voyage to Terebinthia - and Galma - and Seven 
Isles - and the Lone Islands?" 

"Yes," said Susan, "and our great ship the Splendour Hyaline, with the swan's head at her prow and the 
carved swan's wings coming back almost to her waist?" 
"And the silken sails, and the great stern lanterns?" 
"And the feasts on the poop and the musicians." 
"Do you remember when we had the musicians up in the rigging playing flutes so that it sounded like 
music out of the sky?" 
Presently Susan took over Edmund's oar and he came forward to join Lucy. They had passed the island 
now and stood closer in to the shore - all wooded and deserted. They would have thought it very pretty if 
they had not remembered the time when it was open and breezy and full of merry friends. 
"Phew! This is pretty gruelling work," said Peter. "Can't I row for a bit?" said Lucy. "The oars are too 
big for you," said Peter shortly, not because he was cross but because he had no strength to spare for 
talking. 
SUSAN and the two boys were bitterly tired with rowing before they rounded the last headland and 
began the final pull up Glasswater itself, and Lucy's head ached from the long hours of sun and the glare 
on the water. Even Trumpkin longed for the voyage to be over. The seat on which he sat to steer had been 
made for men, not Dwarfs, and his feet did not reach the floor-boards; and everyone knows how 
uncomfortable that is even for ten minutes. And as they all grew more tired, their spirits fell. Up till now 
the children had only been thinking of how to get to Caspian. Now they wondered what they would do 

when they found him, and how a handful of Dwarfs and woodland creatures could defeat an army of 
grown-up Humans. 
Twilight was coming on as they rowed slowly up the windings of Glasswater Creek - a twilight which 
deepened as the banks drew closer together and the overhanging trees began almost to meet overhead. It 
was very quiet in here as the sound of the sea died away behind them; they could even hear the trickle of 
the little streams that poured down from the forest into Glasswater. 
They went ashore at last, far too tired to attempt lighting a fire; and even a supper of apples (though most 
of them felt that they never wanted to see an apple again) seemed better than trying to catch or shoot 
anything. After a little silent munching they all huddled down together in the moss and dead leaves 
between four large beech trees. 
Everyone except Lucy went to sleep at once. Lucy, being far less tired, found it hard to get comfortable. 
Also, she had forgotten till now that all Dwarfs snore. She knew that one of the best ways of getting to 
sleep is to stop trying, so she opened her eyes. 
Through a gap in the bracken and branches she could just see a patch of water in the Creek and the sky 
above it. Then, with a thrill of memory, she saw again, after all those years, the bright Narnian stars. She 
had once known them better than the stars of our own world, because as a Queen in Narnia she had gone 
to bed much later than as a child in England. And there they were - at least, three of the summer 
constellations could be seen from where she lay: the Ship, the Hammer, and the Leopard. "Dear old 
Leopard," she murmured happily to herself. 
Instead of getting drowsier she was getting more awake - with an odd, night-time, dreamish kind of 
wakefulness. The Creek was growing brighter. She knew now that then moon was on it, though she 
couldn't see the moon. And now she began to feel that the whole forest was coming awake like herself. 
Hardly knowing why she did it, she got up quickly and walked a little distance away from their bivouac. 
"This is lovely," said Lucy to herself. It was cool and fresh, delicious smells were floating everywhere. 
Somewhere close by she heard the twitter of a nightingale beginning to sing, then stopping, then 
beginning again. It was a little lighter ahead. She went towards the light and came to a place where there 
were fewer trees, and whole patches or pools of moonlight, but the moonlight and the shadows so mixed 
that you could hardly be sure where anything was or what it was. At the same moment the nightingale, 
satisfied at last with his tuning up, burst into full song. 

Lucy's eyes began to grow accustomed to the light, and she saw the trees that were nearest her more 
distinctly. A great longing for the old days when the trees could talk in Narnia came over her. She knew 
exactly how each of these trees would talk if only she could wake them, and what sort of human form it 
would put on. She looked at a silver birch: it would have a soft, showery voice and would look like a 
slender girl, with hair blown all about her face, and fond of dancing. She looked at the oak: he would be a 
wizened, but hearty old man with a frizzled beard and warts on his face and hands, and hair growing out 
of the warts. She looked at the beech under which she was standing. Ah! she would be the best of all. She 
would be a gracious goddess, smooth and stately, the lady of the wood. 
"Oh, Trees, Trees, Trees," said Lucy (though she had not been intending to speak at all). "Oh, Trees, 
wake, wake, wake. Don't you remember it? Don't you remember me? Dryads and Hamadryads, come out, 
come to me." 
Though there was not a breath of wind they all stirred about her. The rustling noise of the leaves was 
almost like words. The nightingale stopped singing as if to listen to it. 
Lucy felt that at any moment she would begin to understand what the trees were trying to say. But the 
moment did not come. The rustling died away. The nightingale resumed its song. Even in the moonlight 
the wood looked more ordinary again. Yet Lucy had the feeling (as you sometimes have when you are 
trying to remember a name or a date and almost get it, but it vanishes before you really do) that she had 
just missed something: as if she had spoken to the trees a split second too soon or a split second too late, 
or used all the right words except one, or put in one word that was just wrong. 
Quite suddenly she began to feel tired. She went back to the bivouac, snuggled down between Susan and 
Peter, and was asleep in a few minutes. 
It was a cold and cheerless waking for them all next morning, with a grey twilight in the wood (for the 
sun had not yet risen) and everything damp and dirty. 
"Apples, heigh-ho," said Trumpkin with a rueful grin. "I must say you ancient kings and queens don't 
overfeed your courtiers!" 
They stood up and shook themselves and looked about. The trees were thick and they could see no more 

than a few yards in any direction. 
"I suppose your Majesties know the way all right?" said the Dwarf. 
"I don't," said Susan. "I've never seen these woods in my life before. In fact I thought all along that we 
ought to have gone by the river." 
"Then I think you might have said so at the time," answered Peter, with pardonable sharpness. 
"Oh, don't take any notice of her," said Edmund. "She always is a wet blanket. You've got that pocket 
compass of yours, Peter, haven't you? Well, then, we're as right as rain. We've only got to keep on going 
north-west - cross that little river, the what-do-you-call-it? - the Rush -" 
"I know," said Peter. "The one that joins the big river at the Fords of Beruna, or Beruna's Bridge, as the 
D.L.F. calls it." 
"That's right. Cross it and strike uphill, and we'll be at the Stone Table (Aslan's How, I mean) by eight or 
nine o'clock. I hope King Caspian will give us a good breakfast!" 
"I hope you're right," said Susan. "I can't remember all that at all." 
"That's the worst of girls," said Edmund to Peter and the Dwarf. "They never carry a map in their heads." 
"That's because our heads have something inside them," said Lucy. 
At first things seemed to be going pretty well. They even -thought they had struck an old path; but if you 
know anything about woods, you will know that one is always finding imaginary paths. They disappear 
after about five minutes and then you think you have found another (and hope it is not another but more 
of the same one) and it also disappears, and after you have been well lured out of your right direction you 
realize that none of them were pats at all. The boys and the Dwarf, however, were used to woods and 

were not taken in for more than a few seconds. 
They had plodded on for about half an hour (three of them very stiff from yesterday's rowing) when 
Trumpkin suddenly whispered, "Stop." They all stopped. "There's something following us," he said in a 
low voice. "Or rather, something keeping up with us: over there on the left." They all stood still, listening 
and staring till their ears and eyes ached. "You and I'd better each have an arrow on the string," said Susan 
to Trumpkin. The Dwarf nodded, and when both bows were ready for action the party went on again. 
They went a few dozen yards through fairly open woodland, keeping a sharp look-out. Then they came 
to a place where the undergrowth thickened and they had to pass nearer to it. Just as they were passing the 
place, there came a sudden something that snarled and flashed, rising out from the breaking twigs like a 
thunderbolt. Lucy was knocked down and winded, hearing the twang of a bowstring as she fell. When she 
was able to take notice of things again, she saw a great grim-looking grey bear lying dead with 
Trumpkin's arrow in its side. 
"The D.L.F. beat you in that shooting match, Su," said #Peter, with a slightly forced smile. Even he had 
been shaken by this adventure. 
"I - I left it too late," said Susan, in an embarrassed voice. "I was so afraid it might be, you know - one of 
our kind of bears, a talking bear." She hated killing things. 
"That's the trouble of it," said Trumpkin, "when most of the beasts have gone enemy and gone dumb, but 
there are still some of the other kind left. You never know, and you daren't wait to see." 
"Poor old Bruin," said Susan. "You don't think he was?" 
"Not he," said the Dwarf. "I saw the face and I heard the snarl. He only wanted Little Girl for his 
breakfast. And talking of breakfast, I didn't want to discourage your Majesties when you said you hoped 
King Caspian would give you a good one: but meat's precious scarce in camp. And there's good eating on 
a bear. It would be a shame to leave the carcass without taking a bit, and it won't delay us more than half 
an hour. I dare say you two youngsters - Kings, I should say - know how to skin a bear?" 
"Let's go and sit down a fair way off," said Susan to Lucy. "I know what a horrid messy business that will 
be." Lucy shuddered and nodded. When they had sat down she said: "Such a horrible idea has come into 

my head, Su. " 
"What's that?" 
"Wouldn't it be dreadful if some day, in our own world, at home, men started going wild inside, like the 
animals here, and still looked like men, so that you'd never know which were which?" 
"We've got enough to bother about here and now in Narnia," said the practical Susan, "without imagining 
things like that." 
When they rejoined the boys and the Dwarf, as much as they thought they could carry of the best meat 
had been cut off. Raw meat is not a nice thing to fill one's pockets with, but they folded it up in fresh 
leaves and made the best of it. They were all experienced enough to know that they would feel quite 
differently about these squashy and unpleasant parcels when they had walked long enough to be really 
hungry. 
On they trudged again (stopping to wash three pairs of hands that needed it in the first stream they 
passed) until the sun rose and the birds began to sing, and more flies than they wanted were buzzing in the 
bracken. The stiffness from yesterday's rowing began to wear off. Everybody's spirits rose. The sun grew 
warmer and they took their helmets off and carried them. 
"I suppose we are going right?" said Edmund about an hour later. 
"I don't see how we can go wrong as long as we don't bear too much to the left," said Peter. "If we bear 
too much to the right, the worst that can happen is wasting a little time by striking the great River too 
soon and not cutting off the corner." 
And again they trudged on with no sound except the thud of their feet and the jingle of their chain shirts. 
"Where's this bally Rush got to?" said Edmund a good deal later. 

"I certainly thought we'd have struck it by now," said Peter. "But there's nothing to do but keep on." 
They both knew that the Dwarf was looking anxiously at them, but he said nothing. 
And still they trudged on and their mail shirts began to feel very hot and heavy. 
"What on earth?" said Peter suddenly. 
They had come, without seeing it, almost to the edge of a small precipice from which they looked down 
into a gorge with a river at the bottom. On the far side the cliffs rose much higher. None of the party 
except Edmund (and perhaps Trumpkin) was a rock climber. 
"I'm sorry," said Peter. "It's my fault for coming this way. We're lost. I've never seen this place in my life 
before." 
The Dwarf gave a low whistle between his teeth. 
"Oh, do let's go back and go the other way," said Susan. "I knew all along we'd get lost in these woods." 
"Susan!" said Lucy, reproachfully, "don't nag at Peter like that. It's so rotten, and he's doing all he can." 
"And don't you snap at Su like that, either," said Edmund. "I think she's quite right." 
"Tubs and tortoiseshells!" exclaimed Trumpkin. "If we've got lost coming, what chance have we of 
finding our way back? And if we're to go back to the Island and begin all over again - even supposing we 
could - we might as well give the whole thing up. Miraz will have finished with Caspian before we get 
there at that rate." 
"You think we ought to go on?" said Lucy. 

"I'm not sure the High King is lost," said Trumpkin. "What's to hinder this river being the Rush?" 
"Because the Rush is not in a gorge," said Peter, keeping his temper with some difficulty. 
"Your Majesty says is," replied the Dwarf, "but oughtn't you to say was? You knew this country 
hundreds - it may be a thousand - years ago. Mayn't it have changed? A landslide might have pulled off 
half the side of that hill, leaving bare rock, and there are your precipices beyond the gorge. Then the Rush 
might go on deepening its course year after year till you get the little precipices this side. Or there might 
have been an earthquake, or anything." 
"I never thought of that," said Peter. 
"And anyway," continued Trumpkin, "even if this is not the Rush, it's flowing roughly north and so it 
must fall into the Great River anyway. I think I passed something that might have been it, on my way 
down. So if we go downstream, to our right, we'll hit the Great River. Perhaps not so high as we'd hoped, 
but at least we'll be no worse off than if you'd come my way." 
"Trumpkin, you're a brick," said Peter. "Come on, then. Down this side of the gorge." 
"Look! Look! Look!" cried Lucy. 
"Where? What?" said everyone. 
"The Lion," said Lucy. "Aslan himself. Didn't you see?" Her face had changed completely and her eyes 
shone. 
"Do you really mean -?" began Peter. 

"Where did you think you saw him?" asked Susan. 
"Don't talk like a grown-up," said Lucy, stamping her foot. "I didn't think I saw him. I saw him." 
"Where, Lu?" asked Peter. 
"Right up there between those mountain ashes. No, this side of the gorge. And up, not down. Just the 
opposite of the way you want to go. And he wanted us to go where he was - up there." 
"How do you know that was what he wanted?" asked Edmund. 
"He - I - I just know," said Lucy, "by his face." 
The others all looked at each other in puzzled silence. 
"Her Majesty may well have seen a lion," put in Trumpkin. "There are lions in these woods, I've been 
told. But it needn't have been a friendly and talking lion any more than the bear was a friendly and talking 
bear." 
"Oh, don't be so stupid," said Lucy. "Do you think I don't know Aslan when I see him?" 
"He'd be a pretty elderly lion by now," said Trumpkin, "if he's one you knew when you were here before! 
And if it could be the same one, what's to prevent him having gone wild and witless like so many others?" 
Lucy turned crimson and I think she would have flown at Trumpkin, if Peter had not laid his hand on her 
arm. "The D.L.F. doesn't understand. How could he? You must just take it, Trumpkin, that we do really 
know about Aslan; a little bit about him, I mean. And you mustn't talk about him like that again. It isn't 
lucky for one thing: and it's all nonsense for another. The only question is whether Aslan was really 
there." 

"But I know he was," said Lucy, her eyes filling with tears. 
"Yes, Lu, but we don't, you see," said Peter. 
"There's nothing for it but a vote," said Edmund. 
"All right," replied Peter. "You're the eldest, D.L.F. What do you vote for? Up or down?" 
"Down," said the Dwarf. "I know nothing about Aslan. But I do know that if we turn left and follow the 
gorge up, it might lead us all day before we found a place where we could cross it. Whereas if we turn 
right and go down, we're bound to reach the Great River in about a couple of hours. And if there are any 
real lions about, we want to go away from them, not towards them." 
"What do you say, Susan?" 
"Don't be angry, Lu," said Susan, "but I do think we should go down. I'm dead tired. Do let's get out of 
this wretched wood into the open as quick as we can. And none of us except you saw anything." 
"Edmund?" said Peter. 
"Well, there's just this," said Edmund, speaking quickly and turning a little red. "When we first 
discovered Narnia a year ago - or a thousand years ago, whichever it is - it was Lucy who discovered it 
first and none of us would believe her. I was the worst of the lot, I know. Yet she was right after all. 
Wouldn't it be fair to believe her this time? I vote for going up." 
"Oh, Ed!" said Lucy and seized his hand. 
"And now it's your turn, Peter," said Susan, "and I do hope -" 

"Oh, shut up, shut up and let a chap think," interrupted Peter. "I'd much rather not have to vote. " 
"You're the High King," said Trumpkin sternly. 
"Down," said Peter after a long pause. "I know Lucy may be right after all, but I can't help it. We must 
do one or the other." 
So they set off to their right along the edge, downstream. And Lucy came last of the party, crying bitterly. 
To keep along the edge of the gorge was not so easy as it had looked. Before they had gone many yards 
they were confronted with young fir woods growing on the very edge, and after they had tried to go 
through these, stooping and pushing for about ten minutes, they realized that, in there, it would take them 
an hour to do half a mile. So they came back and out again and decided to go round the fir wood. This 
took them much farther to their right than they wanted to go, far out of sight of the cliffs and out of sound 
of the river, till they began to be afraid they had lost it altogether. Nobody knew the time, but it was 
getting to the hottest part of the day. 
When they were able at last to go back to the edge of the gorge (nearly a mile below the point from 
which they had started) they found the cliffs on their side of it a good deal lower and more broken. Soon 
they found a way down into the gorge and continued the journey at the river's edge. But first they had a 
rest and a long drink. No one was talking any more about breakfast, or even dinner, with Caspian. 

They may have been wise to stick to the Rush instead of going along the top. It kept them sure of their 
direction: and ever since the fir wood they had all been afraid of being forced too far out of their course 
and losing themselves in the wood. It was an old and pathless forest, and you could not keep anything like 
a straight course in it. Patches of hopeless brambles, fallen trees, boggy places and dense undergrowth 
would be always getting in your way. But the gorge of the Rush was not at all a nice place for travelling 
either. I mean, it was not a nice place for people in a hurry. For an afternoon's ramble ending in a picnic 
tea it would have been delightful. It had everything you could want on an occasion of that sort - rumbling 
waterfalls, silver cascades, deep, amber-coloured pools, mossy rocks, and deep moss on the banks in 
which you could sink over your ankles, every kind of fern, jewel-like dragon flies, sometimes a hawk 
overhead and once (Peter and Trumpkin. both thought) an eagle. But of course what the children and the 
Dwarf wanted to see as soon as possible was the Great River below them, and Beruna, and the way to 
Aslan's How. 
As they went on, the Rush began to fall more and more steeply. Their journey became more and more of 
a climb and less and less of a walk - in places even a dangerous climb over slippery rock with a nasty drop 
into dark chasms, and the river roaring angrily at the bottom. 
You may be sure they watched the cliffs on their left eagerly for any sign of a break or any place where 
they could climb them; but those cliffs remained cruel. It was maddening, because everyone knew that if 
once they were out of the gorge on that side, they would have only a smooth slope and a fairly short walk 
to Caspian's headquarters. 
The boys and the Dwarf were now in favour of lighting a fire and cooking their bear-meat. Susan didn't 
want this; she only wanted, as she said, "to get on and finish it and get out of these beastly woods". Lucy 
was far too tired and miserable to have any opinion about anything. But as there was no dry wood to be 
had, it mattered very little what anyone thought. The boys began to wonder if raw meat was really as 
nasty as they had always been told. Trumpkin assured them it was. 
Of course, if the children had attempted a journey like this a few days ago in England, they would have 
been knocked up. I think I have explained before how Narnia was altering them. Even Lucy was by now, 
so to speak, only one-third of a little girl going to boarding school for the first time, and two-thirds of 
Queen Lucy of Narnia. 
"At last!" said Susan. 
"Oh, hurray!" said Peter. 

The river gorge had just made a bend and the whole view spread out beneath them. They could see open 
country stretching before them to the horizon and, between it and them, the broad silver ribbon of the 
Great River. They could see the specially broad and shallow place which had once been the Fords of 
Beruna but was now spanned by a long, many-arched bridge. There was a little town at the far end of it. 
"By Jove," said Edmund. "We fought the Battle of Beruna just where that town is!" 
This cheered the boys more than anything. You can't help feeling stronger when you look at a place 
where you won a glorious victory not to mention a kingdom, hundreds of years ago. Peter and Edmund 
were soon so busy talking about the battle that they forgot their sore feet and the heavy drag of their mail 
shirts on their shoulders. The Dwarf was interested too. 
They were all getting on at a quicker pace now. The going became easier. Though there were still sheer 
cliffs on their left, the ground was becoming lower on their right. Soon it was no longer a gorge at all, 
only a valley. There were no more waterfalls and presently they were in fairly thick woods again. 
Then - all at once - whizz, and a sound rather like the stroke of a woodpecker. The children were still 
wondering where (ages ago) they had heard a sound just like that and why they disliked it so, when 
Trumpkin shouted, "Down', at the same moment forcing Lucy (who happened to be next to him) flat 
down into the bracken. Peter, who had been looking up to see if he could spot a squirrel, had seen what it 
was - a long cruel arrow had sunk into a tree trunk just above his head. As he pulled Susan down and 
dropped himself, another came rasping over his shoulder and struck the ground at his side. 
"Quick! Quick! Get back! Crawl!" panted Trumpkin. 
They turned and wriggled along uphill, under the bracken amid clouds of horribly buzzing flies. Arrows 
whizzed round them. One struck Susan's helmet with a sharp ping and glanced off. They crawled quicker. 
Sweat poured off them. Then they ran, stooping nearly double. The boys held their swords in their hands 
for fear they would trip them up. 
It was heart-breaking work - all uphill again, back over the ground they had already travelled. When they 
felt that they really couldn't run any more, even to save their lives, they all dropped down in the damp 
moss beside a waterfall and behind a big boulder, panting. They were surprised to see how high they had 

already got. 
They listened intently and heard no sound of pursuit. 
"So that's all right," said Trumpkin, drawing a deep breath. "They're not searching the wood. Only 
sentries, I expect. But it means that Miraz has an outpost down there. Bottles and battledores! though, it 
was a near thing." 
"I ought to have my head smacked for bringing us this way at all," said Peter. 
"On the contrary, your Majesty," said the Dwarf. "For one thing it wasn't you, it was your royal brother, 
King Edmund, who first suggested going by Glasswater." 
"I'm afraid the D.L.F.'s right," said Edmund, who had quite honestly forgotten this ever since things 
began going wrong. 
"And for another," continued Trumpkin, "if we'd gone my way, we'd have walked straight into that new 
outpost, most likely; or at least had just the same trouble avoiding it. I think this Glasswater route has 
turned out for the best." 
"A blessing in disguise," said Susan. 
"Some disguise!" said Edmund. 
"I suppose we'll have to go right up the gorge again now," said Lucy. 
"Lu, you're a hero," said Peter. "That's the nearest you've got today to saying I told you so. Let's get on." 

"And as soon as we're well up into the forest," said Trumpkin, "whatever anyone says, I'm going to light 
a fire and cook supper. But we must get well away from here." 
There is no need to describe how they toiled back up the gorge. It was pretty hard work, but oddly 
enough everyone felt more cheerful. They were getting their second wind; and the word supper had had a 
wonderful effect. 
They reached the fir wood which had caused them so much trouble while it was still daylight, and 
bivouacked in a hollow just above it. It was tedious gathering the firewood; but it was grand when the fire 
blazed up and they began producing the damp and smeary parcels of bear-meat which would have been so 
very unattractive to anyone who had spent the day indoors. The Dwarf had splendid ideas about cookery. 
Each apple (they still had a few of these) was wrapped up in bear's meat - as if it was to be apple 
dumpling with meat instead of pastry, only much thicker - and spiked on a sharp stick and then roasted. 
And the juice of the apple worked all through the meat, like apple sauce with roast pork. Bear that has 
lived too much on other animals is not very nice, but bear that has had plenty of honey and fruit is 
excellent, and this turned out to be that sort of bear. It was a truly glorious meal. And, of course, no 
washing up - only lying back and watching the smoke from Trumpkin's pipe and stretching one's tired 
legs and chatting. Everyone felt quite hopeful now about finding King Caspian tomorrow and defeating 
Miraz in a few days. It may not have been sensible of them to feel like this, but they did. 
They dropped off to sleep one by one, but all pretty quickly. 
Lucy woke out of the deepest sleep you can imagine, with the feeling that the voice she liked best in the 
world had been calling her name. She thought at first it was her father's voice, but that did not seem quite 
right. Then she thought it was Peter's voice, but that did not seem to fit either. She did not want to get up; 
not because she was still tired - on the contrary she was wonderfully rested and all the aches had gone 
from her bones - but because she felt so extremely happy and comfortable. She was looking straight up at 
the Narnian moon, which is larger than ours, and at the starry sky, for the place where they had 
bivouacked was comparatively open. 
"Lucy," came the call again, neither her father's voice nor Peter's. She sat up, trembling with excitement 
but not with fear. The moon was so bright that the whole forest landscape around her was almost as clear 
as day, though it looked wilder. Behind her was the fir wood; away to her right the jagged cliff-tops on 
the far side of the gorge; straight ahead, open grass to where a glade of trees began about a bow-shot 
away. Lucy looked very hard at the trees of that glade. 
"Why, I do believe they're moving," she said to herself. "They're walking about." 

She got up, her heart beating wildly, and walked towards them. There was certainly a noise in the glade, a 
noise such as trees make in a high wind, though there was no wind tonight. Yet it was not exactly an 
ordinary treenoise either. Lucy felt there was a tune in it, but she could not catch the tune any more than 
she had been able to catch the words when the trees had so nearly talked to her the night before. But there 
was, at least, a lilt; she felt her own feet wanting to dance as she got nearer. And now there was no doubt 
that the trees were really moving moving in and out through one another as if in a complicated country 
dance. ("And I suppose," thought Lucy, "when trees dance, it must be a very, very country dance indeed.') 
She was almost among them now. 
The first tree she looked at seemed at first glance to be not a tree at all but a huge man with a shaggy 
beard and great bushes of hair. She was not frightened: she had seen such things before. But when she 
looked again he was only a tree, though he was still moving. You couldn't see whether he had feet or 
roots, of course, because when trees move they don't walk on the surface of the earth; they wade in it as 
we do in water. The same thing happened with every tree she looked at. At one moment they seemed to be 
the friendly, lovely giant and giantess forms which the tree-people put on when some good magic has 
called them into full life: next moment they all looked like trees again. But when they looked like trees, it 
was like strangely human trees, and when they looked like people, it was like strangely branchy and leafy 
people - and all the time that queer lilting, rustling, cool, merry noise. 
"They are almost awake, not quite," said Lucy. She knew she herself was wide awake, wider than 
anyone usually is. 
She went fearlessly in among them, dancing herself as she leaped this way and that to avoid being run 
into by these huge partners. But she was only half interested in them. She wanted to get beyond them to 
something else; it was from beyond them that the dear voice had called. 
She soon got through them (half wondering whether she had been using her arms to push branches aside, 
or to take hands in a Great Chain with big dancers who stooped to reach her) for they were really a ring of 
trees round a central open place. She stepped out from among their shifting confusion of lovely lights and 
shadows. 
A circle of grass, smooth as a lawn, met her eyes, with dark trees dancing all round it. And then - oh joy! 
For he was there: the huge Lion, shining white in the moonlight, with his huge black shadow underneath 
him. 
But for the movement of his tail he might have been a stone lion, but Lucy never thought of that. She 

never stopped to think whether he was a friendly lion or not. She rushed to him. She felt her heart would 
burst if she lost a moment. And the next thing she knew was that she was kissing him and putting her 
arms as far round his neck as she could and burying her face in the beautiful rich silkiness of his mane. 
"Aslan, Aslan. Dear Aslan," sobbed Lucy. "At last." 
The great beast rolled over on his side so that Lucy fell, half sitting and half lying between his front 
paws. He bent forward and just touched her nose with his tongue. His warm breath came all round her. 
She gazed up into the large wise face. 
"Welcome, child," he said. 
"Aslan," said Lucy, "you're bigger." 
"That is because you are older, little one," answered he. 
"Not because you are?" 
"I am not. But every year you grow, you will find me bigger." 
For a time she was so happy that she did not want to speak. But Aslan spoke. 
"Lucy," he said, "we must not lie here for long. You have work in hand, and much time has been lost 
today." 
"Yes, wasn't it a shame?" said Lucy. "I saw you all right. They wouldn't believe me. They're all so -" 
From somewhere deep inside Aslan's body there came the faintest suggestion of a growl. 

"I'm sorry," said Lucy, who understood some of his moods. "I didn't mean to start slanging the others. 
But it wasn't my fault anyway, was it?" 
The Lion looked straight into her eyes. 
"Oh, Aslan," said Lucy. "You don't mean it was? How could I - I couldn't have left the others and come 
up to you alone, how could I? Don't look at me like that . . . oh well, I suppose I could. Yes, and it 
wouldn't have been alone, I know, not if I was with you. But what would have been the good?" 
Aslan said nothing. 
"You mean," said Lucy rather faintly, "that it would have turned out all right - somehow? But how? 
Please, Aslan! Am I not to know?" 
"To know what would have happened, child?" said Aslan. "No. Nobody is ever told that." 
"Oh dear," said Lucy. 
"But anyone can find out what will happen," said Aslan. "If you go back to the others now, and wake 
them up; and tell them you have seen me again; and that you must all get up at once and follow me - what 
will happen? There is only one way of finding out." 
"Do you mean that is what you want me to do?" gasped Lucy. 
"Yes, little one," said Aslan. 
"Will the others see you too?" asked Lucy. 

"Certainly not at first," said Aslan. "Later on, it depends." 
"But they won't believe me!" said Lucy. 
"It doesn't matter," said Aslan. 
"Oh dear, oh dear," said Lucy. "And I was so pleased at finding you again. And I thought you'd let me 
stay. And I thought you'd come roaring in and frighten all the enemies away - like last time. And now 
everything is going to be horrid." 
"It is hard for you, little one," said Aslan. "But things never happen the same way twice. It has been hard 
for us all in Narnia before now." 
Lucy buried her head in his mane to hide from his face. But there must have been magic in his mane. She 
could feel lion-strength going into her. Quite suddenly she sat up. 
"I'm sorry, Aslan," she said. "I'm ready now." 
"Now you are a lioness," said Aslan. "And now all Narnia will be renewed. But come. We have no time 
to lose." 
He got up and walked with stately, noiseless paces back to the belt of dancing trees through which she 
had just come: and Lucy went with him, laying a rather tremulous hand on his mane. The trees parted to 
let them through and for one second assumed their human forms completely. Lucy had a glimpse of tall 
and lovely wood-gods and wood-goddesses all bowing to the Lion; next moment they were trees again, 
but still bowing, with such graceful sweeps of branch and trunk that their bowing was itself a kind of 
dance. 
"Now, child," said Aslan, when they had left the trees behind them, "I will wait here. Go and wake the 

others and tell them to follow. If they will not, then you at least must follow me alone." 
It is a terrible thing to have to wake four people, all older than yourself and all very tired, for the purpose 
of telling them something they probably won't believe and making them do something they certainly 
won't like. "I mustn't think about it, I must just do it," thought Lucy. 
She went to Peter first and shook him. "Peter," she whispered in his ear, "wake up. Quick. Aslan is here. 
He says we've got to follow him at once." 
"Certainly, Lu. Whatever you like," said Peter unexpectedly. This was encouraging, but as Peter instantly 
rolled round and went to sleep again it wasn't much use. 
Then she tried Susan. Susan did really wake up, but only to say in her most annoying grown-up voice, 
"You've been dreaming, Lucy. Go to sleep again." 
She tackled Edmund next. It was very difficult to wake him, but when at last she had done it he was 
really awake and sat up. 
"Eh?" he said in a grumpy voice. "What are you talking about?" 
She said it all over again. This was one of the worst parts of her job, for each time she said it, it sounded 
less convincing. 
"Aslan!" said Edmund, jumping up. "Hurray! Where?" 
Lucy turned back to where she could see the Lion waiting, his patient eyes fixed upon her. "There," she 
said, pointing. 
"Where?" asked Edmund again. 

"There. There. Don't you see? Just this side of the trees." 
Edmund stared hard for a while and then said, "No. There's nothing there. You've got dazzled and 
muddled with the moonlight. One does, you know. I thought I saw something for a moment myself. It's 
only an optical what-do-you-call-it." 
"I can see him all the time," said Lucy. "He's looking straight at us." 
"Then why can't I see him?" 
"He said you mightn't be able to." 
"Why?" 
"I don't know. That's what he said." 
"Oh, bother it all," said Edmund. "I do wish you wouldn't keep on seeing things. But I suppose we'll have 
to wake the others." 
WHEN the whole party was finally awake Lucy had to tell her story for the fourth time. The blank 
silence which followed it was as discouraging as anything could be. 

"I can't see anything," said Peter after he had stared his eyes sore. "Can you, Susan?" 
"No, of course I can't," snapped Susan. "Because there isn't anything to see. She's been dreaming. Do lie 
down and go to sleep, Lucy." 
"And I do hope," said Lucy in a tremulous voice, "that you will all come with me. Because - because I'll 
have to go with him whether anyone else does or not." 
"Don't talk nonsense, Lucy," said Susan. "Of course you can't go off on your own. Don't let her, Peter. 
She's being downright naughty." 
"I'll go with her, if she must go," said Edmund. "She's been right before." 
"I know she has," said Peter. "And she may have been right this morning. We certainly had no luck going 
down the gorge. Still - at this hour of the night. And why should Aslan be invisible to us? He never used 
to be. It's not like him. What does the D.L.F. say?" 
"Oh, I say nothing at all," answered the Dwarf. "If you all go, of course, I'll go with you; and if your 
party splits up, I'll go with the High King. That's my duty to him and King Caspian. But, if you ask my 
private opinion, I'm a plain dwarf who doesn't think there's much chance of finding a road by night where 
you couldn't find one by day. And I have no use for magic lions which are talking lions and don't talk, and 
friendly lions though they don't do us any good, and whopping big lions though nobody can see them. It's 
all bilge and beanstalks as far as I can see." 
"He's beating his paw on the ground for us to hurry," said Lucy. "We must go now. At least I must." 
"You've no right to try to force the rest of us like that. It's four to one and you're the youngest," said 
Susan. 
"Oh, come on," growled Edmund. "We've got to go. There'll be no peace till we do." He fully intended to 
back Lucy up, but he was annoyed at losing his night's sleep and was making up for it by doing 

everything as sulkily as possible. 
"On the march, then," said Peter, wearily fitting his arm into his shield-strap and putting his helmet on. 
At any other time he would have said something nice to Lucy, who was his favourite sister, for he knew 
how wretched she must be feeling, and he knew that, whatever had happened, it was not her fault. But he 
couldn't help being a little annoyed with her all the same. 
Susan was the worst. "Supposing I started behaving like Lucy," she said. "I might threaten to stay here 
whether the rest of you went on or not. I jolly well think I shall." 
"Obey the High King, your Majesty," said Trumpkin, "and let's be off. If I'm not to be allowed to sleep, 
I'd as soon march as stand here talking." 
And so at last they got on the move. Lucy went first, biting her lip and trying not to say all the things she 
thought of saying to Susan. But she forgot them when she fixed her eyes on Aslan. He turned and walked 
at a slow pace about thirty yards ahead of them. The others had only Lucy's directions to guide them, for 
Aslan was not only invisible to them but silent as well. His big cat-like paws made no noise on the grass. 
He led them to the right of the dancing trees - whether they were still dancing nobody knew, for Lucy 
had her eyes on the Lion and the rest had their eyes on Lucy - and nearer the edge of the gorge. "Cobbles 
and kettledrums!" thought Trumpkin. "I hope this madness isn't going to end in a moonlight climb and 
broken necks." 
For a long way Aslan went along the top of the precipices. Then they came to a place where some little 
trees grew right on the edge. He turned and disappeared among them. Lucy held her breath, for it looked 
as if he had plunged over the cliff; but she was too busy keeping him in sight to stop and think about this. 
She quickened her pace and was soon among the trees herself. Looking down, she could see a steep and 
narrow path going slantwise down into the gorge between rocks, and Aslan descending it. He turned and 
looked at her with his happy eyes. Lucy clapped her hands and began to scramble down after him. From 
behind her she heard the voices of the others shouting, "Hi! Lucy! Look out, for goodness' sake. You're 
right on the edge of the gorge. Come back - "and then, a moment later, Edmund's voice saying, "No, she's 
right. There is a way down." 
Half-way down the path Edmund caught up with her. 

"Look!" he said in great excitement. "Look! What's that shadow crawling down in front of us?" 
"It's his shadow," said Lucy. 
"I do believe you're right, Lu," said Edmund. "I can't think how I didn't see it before. But where is he?" 
"With his shadow, of course. Can't you see him?" 
"Well, I almost thought I did - for a moment. It's such a rum light." 
"Get on, King Edmund, get on," came Trumpkin's voice from behind and above: and then, farther behind 
and still nearly at the top, Peter's voice saying, "Oh, buck up, Susan. Give me your hand. Why, a baby 
could get down here. And do stop grousing." 
In a few minutes they were at the bottom and the roaring of water filled their ears. Treading delicately, 
like a cat, Aslan stepped from stone to stone across the stream. In the middle he stopped, bent down to 
drink, and as he raised his shaggy head, dripping from the water, he turned to face them again. This time 
Edmund saw him. "Oh, Aslan!" he cried, darting forward. But the Lion whisked round and began padding 
up the slope on the far side of the Rush. 
"Peter, Peter," cried Edmund. "Did you see?" 
"I saw something," said Peter. "But it's so tricky in this moonlight. On we go, though, and three cheers 
for Lucy. I don't feel half so tired now, either." 
Aslan without hesitation led them to their left, farther up the gorge. The whole journey was odd and 
dream-like the roaring stream, the wet grey grass, the glimmering cliffs which they were approaching, and 
always the glorious, silently pacing Beast ahead. Everyone except Susan and the Dwarf could see him 
now. 

Presently they came to another steep path, up the face of the farther precipices. These were far higher 
than the ones they had just descended, and the journey up them was a long and tedious zig-zag. 
Fortunately the Moon shone right above the gorge so that neither side was in shadow. 
Lucy was nearly blown when the tail and hind legs of Aslan disappeared over the top: but with one last 
effort she scrambled after him and came out, rather shaky-legged and breathless, on the hill they had been 
trying to reach ever since they left Glasswater. The long gentle slope (heather and grass and a few very 
big rocks that shone white in the moonlight) stretched up to where it vanished in a glimmer of trees about 
half a mile away. She knew it. It was the hill of the Stone Table: 
With a jingling of mail the others climbed up behind her. Aslan glided on before them and they walked 
after him. 
"Lucy," said Susan in a very small voice. 
"Yes?" said Lucy. 
"I see him now. I'm sorry." 
"That's all right." 
"But I've been far worse than you know. I really believed it was him - he, I mean - yesterday. When he 
warned us not to go down to the fir wood. And I really believed it was him tonight, when you woke us up. 
I mean, deep down inside. Or I could have, if I'd let myself. But I just wanted to get out of the woods and 
- and - oh, I don't know. And what ever am I to say to him?" 
"Perhaps you won't need to say much," suggested Lucy. 
Soon they reached the trees and through them the children could see the Great Mound, Aslan's How, 
which had been raised over the Table since their days. 

"Our side don't keep very good watch," muttered Trumpkin. "We ought to have been challenged before 
now -" 
"Hush!" said the other four, for now Aslan had stopped and turned and stood facing them, looking so 
majestic that they felt as glad as anyone can who feels afraid, and as afraid as anyone can who feels glad. 
The boys strode forward: Lucy made way for them: Susan and the Dwarf shrank back. 
"Oh, Aslan," said King Peter, dropping on one knee and raising the Lion's heavy paw to his face, "I'm so 
glad. And I'm so sorry. I've been leading them wrong ever since we started and especially yesterday 
morning." 
"My dear son," said Aslan. 
Then he turned and welcomed Edmund. "Well done," were his words. 
Then, after an awful pause, the deep voice said, "Susan." Susan made no answer but the others thought 
she was crying. "You have listened to fears, child," said Aslan. "Come, let me breathe on you. Forget 
them. Are you brave again?" 
"A little, Aslan," said Susan. 
"And now!" said Aslan in a much louder voice with just a hint of roar in it, while his tail lashed his 
flanks. "And now, where is this little Dwarf, this famous swordsman and archer, who doesn't believe in 
lions? Come here, son of Earth, come HERE!" - and the last word was no longer the hint of a roar but 
almost the real thing. 
"Wraiths and wreckage!" gasped Trumpkin in the ghost of a voice. The children, who knew Aslan well 
enough to see that he liked the Dwarf very much, were not disturbed; but it was quite another thing for 
Trumpkin, who had never seen a lion before, let alone this Lion. He did the only sensible thing he could 
have done; that is, instead of bolting, he tottered towards Aslan. 

Aslan pounced. Have you ever seen a very young kitten being carried in the mother cat's mouth? It was 
like that. The Dwarf, hunched up in a little, miserable ball, hung from Aslan's mouth. The Lion gave him 
one shake and all his armour rattled like a tinker's pack and then - heypresto - the Dwarf flew up in the air. 
He was as safe as if he had been in bed, though he did not feel so. As he came down the huge velvety 
paws caught him as gently as a mother's arms and set him (right way up, too) on the ground. 
"Son of Earth, shall we be friends?" asked Aslan. 
"Ye - he - he - hes," panted the Dwarf, for it had not yet got its breath back. 
"Now," said Aslan. "The Moon is setting. Look behind you: there is the dawn beginning. We have no 
time to lose. You three, you sons of Adam and son of Earth, hasten into the Mound and deal with what 
you will find there." 
The Dwarf was still speechless and neither of the boys dared to ask if Aslan would follow them. All three 
drew their swords and saluted, then turned and jingled away into the dusk. Lucy noticed that there was no 
sign of weariness in their faces: both the High King and King Edmund looked more like men than boys. 
The girls watched them out of sight, standing close beside Aslan. The light was changing. Low down in 
the east, Aravir, the morning star of Narnia, gleamed like a little moon. Aslan, who seemed larger than 
before, lifted his head, shook his mane, and roared. 
The sound, deep and throbbing at first like an organ beginning on a low note, rose and became louder, 
and then far louder again, till the earth and air were shaking with it. It rose up from that hill and floated 
across all Narnia. Down in Miraz's camp men woke, stared palely in one another's faces, and grasped their 
weapons. Down below that in the Great River, now at its coldest hour, the heads and shoulders of the 
nymphs, and the great weedy-bearded head of the river-god, rose from the water. Beyond it, in every field 
and wood, the alert ears of rabbits rose from their holes, the sleepy heads of birds came out from under 
wings, owls hooted, vixens barked, hedgehogs grunted, the trees stirred. In towns and villages mothers 
pressed babies close to their breasts, staring with wild eyes, dogs whimpered, and men leaped up groping 
for lights. Far away on the northern frontier the mountain giants peered from the dark gateways of their 
castles. 
What Lucy and Susan saw was a dark something coming to them from almost every direction across the 
hills. It looked first like a black mist creeping on the ground, then like the stormy waves of a black sea 

rising higher and higher as it came on, and then, at last, like what it was woods on the move. All the trees 
of the world appeared to be rushing towards Aslan. But as they drew nearer they looked less like trees; 
and when the whole crowd, bowing and curtsying and waving thin long arms to Aslan, were all around 
Lucy, she saw that it was a crowd of human shapes. Pale birch-girls were tossing their heads, 
willowwomen pushed back their hair from their brooding faces to gaze on Aslan, the queenly beeches 
stood still and adored him, shaggy oak-men, lean and melancholy elms, shockheaded hollies (dark 
themselves, but their wives all bright with berries) and gay rowans, all bowed and rose again, shouting, 
"Aslan, Aslan!" in their various husky or creaking or wave-like voices. 
The crowd and the dance round Aslan (for it had become a dance once more) grew so thick and rapid 
that Lucy was confused. She never saw where certain other people came from who were soon capering 
about among the trees. One was a youth, dressed only in a fawn-skin, with vine-leaves wreathed in his 
curly hair. His face would have been almost too pretty for a boy's, if it had not looked, so extremely wild. 
You felt, as Edmund said when he saw him a few days later, "There's a chap who might do anything 
absolutely anything." He seemed to have a great many names - Bromios, Bassareus, and the Ram were 
three of them. There were a lot of girls with him, as wild as he. There was even, unexpectedly, someone 
on a donkey. And everybody was laughing: and everybody was shouting out, "Euan, euan, eu-oi-oi-oi." 
"Is it a Romp, Aslan?" cried the youth. And apparently it was. But nearly everyone seemed to have a 
different idea as to what they were playing. It may have been Tig, but Lucy never discovered who was It. 
It was rather like Blind Man's Buff, only everyone behaved as if they were blindfolded. It was not unlike 
Hunt the Slipper, but the slipper was never found. What made it more complicated was that the man on 
the donkey, who was old and enormously fat, began calling out at once, "Refreshments! Time for 
refreshments," and falling off his donkey and being bundled on to it again by the others, while the donkey 
was under the impression that the whole thing was a circus and tried to give a display of walking on its 
hind legs. And all the time there were more and more vine leaves everywhere. And soon not only leaves 
but vines. They were climbing up everything. They were running up the legs of the tree people and 
circling round their necks. Lucy put up her hands to push back her hair and found she was pushing back 
vine branches. The donkey was a mass of them. His tail was completely entangled and something dark 
was nodding between his ears. Lucy looked again and saw it was a bunch of grapes. After that it was 
mostly grapes overhead and underfoot and all around. 
"Refreshments! Refreshments," roared the old man. 
Everyone began eating, and whatever hothouses your people may have, you have never tasted such 
grapes. Really good grapes, firm and tight on the outside, but bursting into cool sweetness when you put 
them into your mouth, were one of the things the girls had never had quite enough of before. Here, there 
were more than anyone could possibly want, and rib table-manners at all. One saw sticky and stained 
fingers everywhere, and, though mouths were full, the laughter never ceased nor the yodelling cries of 
Euan, euan, eu-oi-oi-oi-oi, till all of a sudden everyone felt at the same moment that the game (whatever it 
was), and the feast, ought to be over, and everyone flopped down breathless on the ground and turned 
their faces to Aslan to hear what he would say next. 

At that moment the sun was just rising and Lucy remembered something and whispered to Susan, 
"I say, Su, I know who they are." 
"Who?" 
"The boy with the wild face is Bacchus and the old one on the donkey is Silenus. Don't you remember Mr 
Tumnus telling us about them long ago?" 
"Yes, of course. But I say, Lu " 
"What?" 
"I wouldn't have felt safe with Bacchus and all his wild girls if we'd met them without Aslan." 
"I should think not," said Lucy. 
MEANWHILE Trumpkin and the two boys arrived at the dark little stone archway which led into the 

inside of the Mound, and two sentinel badgers (the white patches on their cheeks were all Edmund could 
see of them) leaped up with bared teeth and asked them in snarling voices, "Who goes there?" 
"Trumpkin," said the Dwarf. "Bringing the High King of Narnia out of the far past." 
The badgers nosed at the boys' hands. "At last," they said. "At last." 
"Give us a light, friends," said Trumpkin. 
The badgers found a torch just inside the arch and Peter lit it and handed it to Trumpkin. "The D.L.F. 
had better lead," he said. "We don't know our way about this place." 
Trumpkin took the torch and went ahead into the dark tunnel. It was a cold, black, musty place, with an 
occasional bat fluttering in the torchlight, and plenty of cobwebs. The boys, who had been mostly in the 
open air since that morning at the railway station, felt as if they were going into a trap or a prison. 
"I say, Peter," whispered Edmund. "Look at those carvings on the walls. Don't they look old? And yet 
we're older than that. When we were last here, they hadn't been made." 
"Yes," said Peter. "That makes one think." 
The Dwarf went on ahead and then turned to the right, and then to the left, and then down some steps, 
and then to the left again. Then at last they saw a light ahead - light from under a door. And now for the 
first time they heard voices, for they had come to the door of the central chamber. The voices inside were 
angry ones. Someone was talking so loudly that the approach of the boys and the Dwarf had not been 
heard. 
"Don't like the sound of that," whispered Trumpkin to Peter. "Let's listen for a moment." All three stood 
perfectly still on the outside of the door. 

"You know well enough," said a voice ("That's the King," whispered Trumpkin), "why the Horn was not 
blown at sunrise this morning. Have you forgotten that Miraz fell upon us almost before Trumpkin had 
gone, and we were fighting for our lives for the space of three hours and more? I blew it when first I had a 
breathing space." 
"I'm not likely to forget it," came the angry voice, "when my Dwarfs bore the brunt of the attack and one 
in five of them fell." ("That's Nikabrik," whispered Trumpkin.) 
"For shame, Dwarf," came a thick voice ("Trufflehunter's," said Trumpkin). "We all did as much as the 
Dwarfs and none more than the King." 
"Tell that tale your own way for all I care," answered Nikabrik. "But whether it was that the Horn was 
blown too late, or whether there was no magic in it, no help has come. You, you great clerk, you master 
magician, you know-all; are you still asking us to hang our hopes on Aslan and King Peter and all the rest 
of it?" 
"I must confess - I cannot deny it - that I am deeply disappointed in the result of the operation," came the 
answer. ("That'll be Doctor Cornelius," said Trumpkin.) 
"To speak plainly," said Nikabrik, "your wallet's empty, your eggs addled, your fish uncaught, your 
promises broken. Stand aside then and let others work. And that is why -" 
"The help will come," said Trufflehunter. "I stand by Aslan. Have patience, like us beasts. The help will 
come. It may be even now at the door." 
"Pah!" snarled Nikabrik. "You badgers would have us wait till the sky falls and we can all catch larks. I 
tell you we can't wait. Food is running short; we lose more than we can afford at every encounter; our 
followers are slipping away." 
"And why?" asked Trufflehunter. "I'll tell you why. Because it is noised among them that we have called 
on the Kings of old and the Kings of old have not answered. The last words Trumpkin spoke before he 
went (and went, most likely, to his death) were, `If you must blow the Horn, do not let the army know 
why you blow it or what you hope from it.' But that same evening everyone seemed to know." 

"You'd better have shoved your grey snout in a hornets' nest, Badger, than suggest that I am the blab," 
said Nikabrik. "Take it back, or-" 
"Oh, stop it, both of you," said King Caspian. "I want to know what it is that Nikabrik keeps on hinting 
we should do. But before that, I want to know who those two strangers are whom he has brought into our 
council and who stand there with their ears open and their mouths shut." 
"They are friends of mine," said Nikabrik. "And what better right have you yourself to be here than that 
you are a friend of Trumpkin's and the Badger's? And what right has that old dotard in the black gown to 
be here except that he is your friend? Why am I to be the only one who can't bring in his friends?" 
"His Majesty is the King to whom you have sworn allegiance," said Trufflehunter sternly. 
"Court manners, court manners," sneered Nikabrik. "But in this hole we may talk plainly. You know - 
and he knows that this Telmarine boy will be king of nowhere and nobody in a week unless we can help 
him out of the trap in which he sits." 
"Perhaps," said Cornelius, "your new friends would like to speak for themselves? You there, who and 
what are you?" 
"Worshipful Master Doctor," came a thin, whining voice. "So please you, I'm only a poor old woman, I 
am, and very obliged to his Worshipful Dwarfship for his friendship, I'm sure. His Majesty, bless his 
handsome face, has no need to be afraid of an old woman that's nearly doubled up with the rheumatics 
and hasn't two sticks to put under her kettle. I have some poor little skill - not like yours, Master Doctor, 
of course - in small spells and cantrips that I'd be glad to use against our enemies if it was agreeable to all 
concerned. For I hate 'em. Oh yes. No one hates better than me." 
"That is all most interesting and - er - satisfactory," said Doctor Cornelius. "I think I now know what you 
are, Madam. Perhaps your other friend, Nikabrik, would give some account of himself?" 
A dull, grey voice at which Peter's flesh crept replied, "I'm hunger. I'm thirst. Where I bite, I hold till I 
die, and even after death they must cut out my mouthful from my enemy's body and bury it with me. I can 

fast a hundred years and not die. I can lie a hundred nights on the ice and not freeze. I can drink a river of 
blood and not burst. Show me your enemies." 
"And it is in the presence of these two that you wish to disclose your plan?" said Caspian. 
"Yes," said Nikabrik. "And by their help that I mean to execute it." 
There was a minute or two during which Trumpkin and the boys could hear Caspian and his two friends 
speaking in low voices but could not make out what they were saying. Then Caspian spoke aloud. 
"Well, Nikabrik," he said, "we will hear your plan." 
There was a pause so long that the boys began to wonder if Nikabrik was ever going to begin; when he 
did, it was in a lower voice, as if he himself did not much like what he was saying. 
"All said and done," he muttered, "none of us knows the truth about the ancient days in Narnia. 
Trumpkin believed none of the stories. I was ready to put them to the trial. We tried first the Horn and it 
has failed. If there ever was a High King Peter and a Queen Susan and a King Edmund and a Queen Lucy, 
then either they have not heard us, or they cannot come, or they are our enemies -" 
"Or they are on the way," put in Trufflehunter. 
"You can go on saying that till Miraz has fed us all to his dogs. As I was saying, we have tried one link 
in the chain of old legends, and it has done us no good. Well. But when your sword breaks, you draw your 
dagger. The stories tell of other powers beside the ancient Kings and Queens. How if we could call them 
up?" 
"If you mean Aslan," said Trufflehunter, "it's all one calling on him and on the Kings. They were his 
servants. If he will not send them (but I make no doubt he will), is he more likely to come himself?" 

"No. You're right there," said Nikabrik. "Aslan and the Kings go together. Either Aslan is dead, or he is 
not on our side. Or else something stronger than himself keeps him back. And if he did come - how do we 
know he'd be our friend? He was not always a good friend to Dwarfs by all that's told. Not even to all 
beasts. Ask the Wolves. And anyway, he was in Narnia only once that I ever heard of, and he didn't stay 
long. You may drop Aslan out of the reckoning. I was thinking of someone else." 
There was no answer, and for a few minutes it was so still that Edmund could hear the wheezy and 
snuffling breath of the Badger. 
"Who do you mean?" said Caspian at last. 
"I mean a power so much greater than Aslan's that it held Narnia spellbound for years and years, if the 
stories are true." 
"The White Witch!" cried three voices all at once, and from the noise Peter guessed that three people had 
leaped to their feet. 
"Yes," said Nikabrik very slowly and distinctly, "I mean the Witch. Sit down again. Don't all take fright 
at a name as if you were children. We want power: and we want a power that will be on our side. As for 
power, do not the stories say that the Witch defeated Aslan, and bound him, and killed him on that very 
stone which is over there, just beyond the light?" 
"But they also say that he came to life again," said the Badger sharply. 
"Yes, they say," answered Nikabrik, "but you'll notice that we hear precious little about anything he did 
afterwards. He just fades out of the story. How do you explain that, if he really came to life? Isn't it much 
more likely that he didn't, and that the stories say nothing more about him because there was nothing more 
to say?" 
"He established the Kings and Queens," said Caspian. 
"A King who has just won a great battle can usually establish himself without the help of a performing 

lion," said Nikabrik. There was a fierce growl, probably from Trufflehunter. 
"And anyway," Nikabrik continued, "what came of the Kings and their reign? They faded too. But it's 
very different with the Witch. They say she ruled for a hundred years: a hundred years of winter. There's 
power, if you like. There's something practical." 
"But, heaven and earth!" said the King, "haven't we always been told that she was the worst enemy of 
all? Wasn't she a tyrant ten times worse than Miraz?" 
"Perhaps," said Nikabrik in a cold voice. "Perhaps she was for you humans, if there were any of you in 
those days. Perhaps she was for some of the beasts. She stamped out the Beavers, I dare say; at least there 
are none of them in Narnia now. But she got on all right with us Dwarfs. I'm a Dwarf and I stand by my 
own people. We're not afraid of the Witch." 
"But you've joined with us," said Trufflehunter. 
"Yes, and a lot of good it has done my people, so far," snapped Nikabrik. "Who is sent on all the 
dangerous !, raids? The Dwarfs. Who goes short when the rations fail? The Dwarfs. Who -?" 
"Lies! All lies!" said the Badger. 
"And so," said Nikabrik, whose voice now rose to a scream, "if you can't help my people, I'll go to 
someone who can." 
"Is this open treason, Dwarf?" asked the King. 
"Put that sword back in its sheath, Caspian," said Nikabrik. "Murder at council, eh? Is that your game? 
Don't be fool enough to try it. Do you think I'm afraid of you? There's three on my side, and three on 
yours." 

"Come on, then," snarled Trufflehunter, but he was immediately interrupted. 
"Stop, stop, stop," said Doctor Cornelius. "You go on too fast. The Witch is dead. All the stories agree 
on that. What does Nikabrik mean by calling on the Witch?" 
That grey and terrible voice which had spoken only once before said, "Oh, is she?" 
And then the shrill, whining voice began, "Oh, bless his heart, his dear little Majesty needn't mind about 
the White Lady - that's what we call her - being dead. The Worshipful Master Doctor is only making 
game of a poor old woman like me when he says that. Sweet Mastery Doctor, learned Master Doctor, who 
ever heard of a witch that really died? You can always get them back." 
"Call her up," said the grey voice. "We are all ready. Draw the circle. Prepare the blue fire." 
Above the steadily increasing growl of the Badger and Cornelius's sharp "What?" rose the voice of King 
Caspian like thunder. 
"So that is your plan, Nikabrik! Black sorcery and the calling up of an accursed ghost. And I see who 
your companions are-a Hag and a Werewolf!" 
The next minute or so was very confused. There was an animal roaring, a clash of steel; the boys and 
Trumpkin rushed in; Peter had a glimpse of a horrible, grey, gaunt creature, half man and half wolf, in the 
very act of leaping upon a boy about his own age, and Edmund saw a badger and a Dwarf rolling on the 
floor in a sort of cat fight. Trumpkin found himself face to face with the Hag. Her nose and chin stuck out 
like a pair of nut-crackers, her dirty grey hair was flying about her face and she had just got Doctor 
Cornelius by the throat. At one slash of Trumpkin's sword her head rolled on the floor. Then the light was 
knocked over and it was all swords, teeth, claws, fists, and boots for about sixty seconds. Then silence. 
"Are you all right, Ed?" 
"I - I think so," panted Edmund. "I've got that brute Nikabrik, but he's still alive." 

"Weights and water-bottles!" came an angry voice. "It's me you're sitting on. Get off. You're like a young 
elephant." 
"Sorry, D.L.F.," said Edmund. "Is that better?" 
"Ow! No!" bellowed Trumpkin. "You're putting your ' boot in my mouth. Go away." ` 
"Is King Caspian anywhere?" asked Peter. 
"I'm here," said a rather faint voice. "Something bit me." 
They all heard the noise of someone striking a match. It was Edmund. The little flame showed his face, 
looking pale and dirty. He blundered about for a little, found the candle (they were no longer using the 
lamp, for they had run out of oil), set it on the table, and lit it. When the flame rose clear, several people 
scrambled to their feet. Six faces blinked at one another in the candlelight. 
"We don't seem to have any enemies left," said Peter. "There's the Hag, dead." (He turned his eyes 
quickly away from her.) "And Nikabrik, dead too. And I suppose this thing is a Werewolf. It's so long 
since I've seen one. Wolf's head and man's body. That means he was just turning from man into wolf at 
the moment he was killed. And you, I suppose, are King Caspian?" 
"Yes," said the other boy. "But I've no idea who you are." 
"It's the High King, King Peter," said Trumpkin. 
"Your Majesty is very welcome," said Caspian. 
"And so is your Majesty," said Peter. "I haven't come to take your place, you know, but to put you into 

it." , 
"Your Majesty," said another voice at Peter's elbow. He turned and found himself face to face with the 
Badger. 
Peter leaned forward, put his arms round the beast and kissed the furry head: it wasn't a girlish thing for 
him to do, because he was the High King. 
"Best of badgers," he said. "You never doubted us all through." 
"No credit to me, your Majesty," said Trufflehunter. "1'm a beast and we don't change. I'm a badger, 
what's more, and we hold on." 
"I am sorry for Nikabrik," said Caspian, "though he hated me from the first moment he saw me. He had 
gone sour inside from long suffering and hating. If we had won quickly he might have become a good 
Dwarf in the days of peace. I don't know which of us killed him. I'm glad of that." 
"You're bleeding," said Peter. 
"Yes, I'm bitten," said Caspian. "It was that - that wolf thing." Cleaning and bandaging the wound took a 
long time, and when it was done Trumpkin said, "Now. Before everything else we want some breakfast." 
"But not here," said Peter. 
"No," said Caspian with a shudder. "And we must send someone to take away the bodies." 
"Let the vermin be flung into a pit," said Peter. "But the Dwarf we will give to his people to be buried in 
their own fashion." 

They breakfasted at last in another of the dark cellars of Aslan's How. It was not such a breakfast as they 
would have chosen, for Caspian and Cornelius were thinking of venison pasties, and Peter and Edmund of 
buttered eggs and hot coffee, but what everyone got was a little bit of cold bear-meat (out of the boys' 
pockets), a lump of hard cheese, an onion, and a mug of water. But, from the way they fell to, anyone 
would have supposed it was delicious. 
"Now," said Peter, as they finished their meal, "Aslan and the girls (that's Queen Susan and Queen Lucy, 
Caspian) are somewhere close. We don't know when he will act. In his time, no doubt, not ours. In the 
meantime he would like us to do what we can on our own. You say, Caspian, we are not strong enough to 
meet Miraz in pitched battle?" 
"I'm afraid not, High King," said Caspian. He was liking Peter very much, but was rather tongue-tied. It 
was much stranger for him to meet the great Kings out of the old stories than it was for them to meet him. 
"Very well, then," said Peter, "I'll send him a challenge to single combat." No one had thought of this 
before. 
"Please," said Caspian, "could it not be me? I want to avenge my father." 
"You're wounded," said Peter. "And anyway, wouldn't he just laugh at a challenge from you? I mean, we 
have seen that you are a king and a warrior but he thinks of you as a kid." 
"But, Sire," said the Badger, who sat very close to Peter and never took his eyes off him. "Will he accept 
a . challenge even from you? He knows he has the stronger . army." 

"Very likely he won't," said Peter, "but there's always the chance. And even if he doesn't, we shall spend 
the best part of the day sending heralds to and fro and all that. By then Aslan may have done something. 
And at least I can inspect the army and strengthen the position. I will send the challenge. In fact I will 
write it at once. Have you pen and ink, Master Doctor?" 
"A scholar is never without them, your Majesty," answered Doctor Cornelius. 
"Very well, I will dictate," said Peter. And while the Doctor spread out a parchment and opened his inkhorn 
and sharpened his pen, Peter leant back with half-closed eyes and recalled to his mind the language 
in which he had written such things long ago in Narnia's golden age. 
"Right," he said at last. "And now, if you are ready, Doctor?" 
Doctor Cornelius dipped his pen and waited. Peter dictated as follows: 
"Peter, by the gift of Aslan, by election, by prescription, and by conquest, High King over all Kings in 
Narnia, Emperor of the Lone Islands and Lord of Cair Paravel, Knight of the Most Noble Order of the 
Lion, to Miraz, Son of Caspian the Eighth, sometime Lord Protector of Narnia and now styling himself 
King of Narnia, Greeting. Have you got that?" 
"Narnia, comma, greeting," muttered the Doctor. "Yes, Sire." 
"Then begin a new paragraph," said Peter. "For to prevent the effusion of blood, and for the avoiding all 
other inconveniences likely to grow from the wars now levied in our realm of Narnia, it is our pleasure to 
adventure our royal person on behalf of our trusty and well-beloved Caspian in clean wager of battle to 
prove upon your Lordship's body that the said Caspian is lawful King under us in Narnia both by our gift 
and by the laws of the Telmarines, and your Lordship twice guilty of treachery both in withholding the 
dominion of Narnia from the said Caspian and in the most abhominable, - don't forget to spell it with an 
H, Doctor - bloody, and unnatural murder of your kindly lord and brother King Caspian Ninth of that 
name. Wherefore we most heartily provoke, challenge, and defy your Lordship to the said combat and 
monomachy, and have sent these letters by the hand of our well beloved and royal brother Edmund, 
sometime King under us in Narnia, Duke of Lantern Waste and Count of the Western March, Knight of 
the Noble Order of the Table, to whom we have given full power of determining with your Lordship all 

the conditions of the said battle. Given at our lodging in Aslan's How this XII day of the month Greenroof 
in the first year of Caspian Tenth of Narnia. 
"That ought to do," said Peter, drawing a deep breath. 
"And now we must send two others with King Edmund. I think the Giant ought to be one." 
"He's - he's not very clever, you know," said Caspian. 
"Of course not," said Peter. "But any giant looks impressive if only he will keep quiet. And it will cheer 
him up. But who for the other?" 
"Upon my word," said Trumpkin, "if you want someone who can kill with looks, Reepicheep would be 
the best." 
"He would indeed, from all I hear," said Peter with a laugh. "If only he wasn't so small. They wouldn't 
even see him till he was close!" 
"Send Glenstorm, Sire," said Trufflehunter. "No one ever laughed at a Centaur." 
An hour later two great lords in the army of Miraz, the Lord Glozelle and the Lord Sopespian, strolling 
along their lines and picking their teeth after breakfast, looked up and saw coming down to them from the 
wood the Centaur and Giant Wimbleweather, whom they had seen before in battle, and between them a 
figure they could not recognize. Nor indeed would the other boys at Edmund's school have recognized 
him if they could have seen him at that moment. For Aslan had breathed on him at their meeting and a 
kind of greatness hung about him. 
"What's to do?" said the Lord Glozelle. "An attack?" 
"A parley, rather," said Sopespian. "See, they carry green branches. They are coming to surrender most 

likely." 
"He that is walking between the Centaur and the Giant has no look of surrender in his face," said 
Glozelle. "Who can he be? It is not the boy Caspian." 
"No indeed," said Sopespian. "This is a fell warrior, I warrant you, wherever the rebels have got him 
from. He is (in your Lordship's private ear) a kinglier man than ever Miraz was. And what mail he wears! 
None of our smiths can make the like." 
"I'll wager my dappled Pomely he brings a challenge, not a surrender," said Glozelle. 
"How then?" said Sopespian. "We hold the enemy in our fist here. Miraz would never be so hair-brained 
as to throw away his advantage on a combat." 
"He might be brought to it," said Glozelle in a much lower voice. 
"Softly," said Sopespian. "Step a little aside here out of earshot of those sentries. Now. Have I taken 
your Lordship's meaning aright?" 
"If the King undertook wager of battle," whispered Glozelle, "why, either he would kill or be killed." 
"So," said Sopespian, nodding his head. 
"And if he killed we should have won this war." 
"Certainly. And if not?" 
"Why, if not, we should be as able to win it without the King's grace as with him. For I need not tell your 

Lordship that Miraz is no very great captain. And after that, we should be both victorious and kingless." 
"And it is your meaning, my Lord, that you and I could hold this land quite as conveniently without a 
King as with one?" 
Glozelle's face grew ugly. "Not forgetting," said he, "that it was we who first put him on the throne. And 
in all the years that he has enjoyed it, what fruits have come our way? What gratitude has he shown us?" 
"Say no more," answered Sopespian. "But look - herd comes one to fetch us to the King's tent." ` 
When they reached Miraz's tent they saw Edmund and his two companions seated outside it and being 
entertained with cakes and wine, having already delivered the challenge, and withdrawn while the King 
was considering it. When they saw them thus at close quarters the two Telmarine lords thought all three of 
them very alarming. 
Inside, they found Miraz, unarmed and finishing his breakfast. His face was flushed and there was a 
scowl on his brow. 
"There!" he growled, flinging the parchment across the table to them. "See what a pack of nursery tales 
our jackanapes of a nephew has sent us." 
"By your leave, Sire," said Glozelle. "If the young warrior whom we have just seen outside is the King 
Edmund mentioned in the writing, then I would not call him a nursery tale but a very dangerous knight." 
"King Edmund, pah!" said Miraz. "Does your Lordship believe those old wives' fables about Peter and 
Edmund and the rest?" 
"I believe my eyes, your Majesty," said Glozelle. 
"Well, this is to no purpose," said Miraz, "but as touching the challenge, I suppose there is only one 

opinion between us?" 
"I suppose so, indeed, Sire," said Glozelle. 
"And what is that?" asked the King. 
"Most infallibly to refuse it," said Glozelle. "For though I have never been called a coward, I must 
plainly say that to meet that young man in battle is more than my heart would serve me for. And if (as is 
likely) his brother, the High King, is more dangerous than he why, on your life, my Lord King, have 
nothing to do with him." 
"Plague on you!" cried Miraz. "It was not that sort of council I wanted. Do you think I am asking you if I 
should be afraid to meet this Peter (if there is such a man)? Do you think I fear him? I wanted your 
counsel on the policy of the matter; whether we, having the advantage, should hazard it on a wager of 
battle." 
"To which I can only answer, your Majesty," said Glozelle, "that for all reasons the challenge should be 
refused. There is death in the strange knight's face." 
"There you are again!" said Miraz, now thoroughly angry. "Are you trying, to make it appear that I am as 
great a coward as your Lordship?" 
"Your Majesty may say your pleasure," said Glozelle sulkily. 
"You talk like an old woman, Glozelle," said the King. "What say you, my Lord Sopespian?" 
"Do not touch it, Sire," was the reply. "And what your Majesty says of the policy of the thing comes in 
very happily. It gives your Majesty excellent grounds for a refusal without any cause for questioning your 
Majesty's honour or courage." 

"Great Heaven!" exclaimed Miraz, jumping to his feet. "Are you also bewitched today? Do you think I 
am looking for grounds to refuse it? You might as well call me coward to my face." 
The conversation was going exactly as the two lords wished, so they said nothing. 
"I see what it is," said Miraz, after staring at them as if his eyes would start out of his head, "you are as 
lilylivered as hares yourselves and have the effrontery to imagine my heart after the likeness of yours! 
Grounds for a refusal, indeed! Excuses for not fighting! Are you soldiers? Are you Telmarines? Are you 
men? And if I dog refuse it (as ail good reasons of captaincy and martial policy urge me to do) you will 
think, and teach others tan think, I was afraid. Is it not so?" 
"No man of your Majesty's age," said Glozelle, "would be called coward by any wise soldier for refusing 
the combat with a great warrior in the flower of his youth." 
"So I'm to be a dotard with one foot in the grave, as well as a dastard," roared Miraz. "I'll tell you what it 
is, my Lords. With your womanish counsels (ever shying from the true point, which is one of policy) you 
have done the very opposite of your intent. I had meant to refuse it. But I'll accept it. Do you hear, accept 
it! I'll not be shamed because some witchcraft or treason has frozen both your bloods." 
"We beseech your Majesty -" said Glozelle, but Miraz had flung out of the tent and they could hear him 
bawling out his acceptance to Edmund. 
The two lords looked at one another and chuckled quietly. 
"I knew he'd do it if he were properly chafed," said Glozelle. "But I'll not forget he called me coward. It 
shall be paid for." 
There was a great stirring at Aslan's How when the news came back and was communicated to the 
various creatures. Edmund, with one of Miraz's captains, had already marked out the place for the combat, 
and ropes and stakes had been put round it. Two Telmarines were to stand at two of the corners, and one 
in the middle of one side, as marshals of the lists. Three marshals for the other two corners and the other 
side were to be furnished by the High King. Peter was just explaining to Caspian that he could not be one, 
because his right to the throne was what they were fighting about, when suddenly a thick, sleepy voice 
said, "Your Majesty, please." Peter turned and there stood the eldest of the Bulgy Bears. 

"If you please, your Majesty," he said, "I'm a bear, I am." 
"To be sure, so you are, and a good bear too, I don't doubt," said Peter. 
"Yes," said the Bear. "But it was always a right of the, bears to supply one marshal of the lists." 
"Don't let him," whispered Trumpkin to Peter. "He's a good creature, but he'll shame us all. He'll go to 
sleep and he will suck his paws. In front of the enemy too." 
"I can't help that," said Peter. "Because he's quite right. The Bears had that privilege. I can't imagine how 
it has been remembered all these years, when so many other things have been forgotten." 
"Please, your Majesty," said the Bear. 
"It is your right," said Peter. "And you shall be one of the marshals. But you must remember not to suck 
your paws." 
"Of course not," said the Bear in a very shocked voice. 
"Why, you're doing it this minute!" bellowed Trumpkin. 
The Bear whipped his paw out of his mouth and pretended he hadn't heard. 
"Sire!" came a shrill voice from near the ground. 

"Ah - Reepicheep!" said Peter after looking up and down and round as people usually did when 
addressed by the Mouse. 
"Sire," said Reepicheep. "My life is ever at your command, but my honour is my own. Sire, I have 
among my people the only trumpeter in your Majesty's army. I had thought, perhaps, we might have been 
sent with the challenge. Sire, my people are grieved. Perhaps if it were your pleasure that I should be a 
marshal of the lists, it would content them." 
A noise not unlike thunder broke out from somewhere overhead at this point, as Giant Wimbleweather 
burst into one of those not very intelligent laughs to which the nicer sorts of Giant are so liable. He 
checked himself at once and looked as grave as a turnip by the time Reepicheep discovered where the 
noise came from. 
"I am afraid it would not do," said Peter very gravely. "Some humans are afraid of mice -" 
"I had observed it, Sire," said Reepicheep. 
"And it would not be quite fair to Miraz," Peter continued, "to have in sight anything that might abate the 
edge of his courage." 
"Your Majesty is the mirror of honour," said the Mouse with one of his admirable bows. "And on this 
matter we have but a single mind... I thought I heard someone laughing just now. If anyone present 
wishes to make me the subject of his wit, I am very much at his service - with my sword - whenever he 
has leisure." 
An awful silence followed this remark, which was broken by Peter saying, "Giant Wimbleweather and 
the Bear and the Centaur Glenstorm shall be our marshals. The combat will be at two hours after noon. 
Dinner at noon precisely." 
"I say," said Edmund as they walked away, "I suppose it is all right. I mean, I suppose you can beat 
him?" 

"That's what I'm fighting him to find out," said Peter. 
A LITTLE before two o'clock Trumpkin and the Badger sat with the rest of the creatures at the wood's 
edge looking across at the gleaming line of Miraz's army which was about two arrow-shots away. In 
between, a square space of level grass had been staked for the combat. At the two far corners stood 
Glozelle and Sopespian with drawn swords. At the near corners were Giant Wimbleweather and the Bulgy 
Bear, who in spite of all their warnings was sucking his paws and looking, to tell the truth, uncommonly 
silly. To make up for this, Glenstorm on the right of the lists, stock-still except when he stamped a hind 
hoof occasionally on the turf, looked much more imposing than the Telmarine baron who faced him on 
the left. Peter had just shaken hands with Edmund and the Doctor, and was now walking down to the 
combat. It was like the moment before the pistol goes at an important race, but very much worse. 
"I wish Aslan had turned up before it came to this," said Trumpkin. 
"So do I," said Trufflehunter. "But look behind you." 
"Crows and crockery!" muttered the Dwarf as soon as he had done so. "What are they? Huge people - 
beautiful people - like gods and goddesses and giants. Hundreds and thousands of them, closing in behind 
us. What are they?" 
"It's the Dryads and Hamadryads and Silvans," said Trufflehunter. "Aslan has waked them." 
"Humph!" said the Dwarf. "That'll be very useful if the enemy try any treachery. But it won't help the 
High King very much if Miraz proves handier with his sword." 

The Badger said nothing, for now Peter and Miraz were entering the lists from opposite ends, both on 
foot, both in chain shirts, with helmets and shields. They advanced till they were close together. Both 
bowed and seemed to speak,, but it was impossible to hear what they said. Next moment, the two swords 
flashed in the sunlight. For a second the clash could be heard but it was immediately drowned because 
both armies began shouting like crowds at a football match. 
"Well done, Peter, oh, well done!" shouted Edmund as he saw Miraz reel back a whole pace and a half. 
"Follow it up, quick!" And Peter did, and for a few seconds it looked as if the fight might be won. But 
then Miraz pulled himself together - began to make real use of his height and weight "Miraz! Miraz! The 
King! The King!" came the roar of the Telmarines. Caspian and Edmund grew white with sickening 
anxiety. 
"Peter is taking some dreadful knocks," said Edmund. 
"Hullo!" said Caspian. "What's happening now?" 
"Both falling apart," said Edmund. "A bit blown, expect. Watch. Ah, now they're beginning again, more 
scientifically this time. Circling round and round, feeling each other's defences." 
"I'm afraid this Miraz knows his work," muttered the Doctor. But hardly had he said this when there was 
such a clapping and baying and throwing up of hoods among the Old Narnians that it was nearly 
deafening. 
"What was it? What was it?" asked the Doctor. "My old eyes missed it." 
"The High King has pricked him in the arm-pit," said Caspian, still clapping. "Just where the arm-hole of 
the hauberk let the point through. First blood.’ 
"It's looking ugly again now, though," said Edmund. "Peter's not using his shield properly. He must be 
hurt in the left arm." 

It was only too true. Everyone could see that Peter's shield hung limp. The shouting of the Telmarines 
redoubled. 
"You've seen more battles than I," said Caspian. "Is there any chance now?" 
"Precious little," said Edmund. "I suppose he might just do it. With luck." 
"Oh, why did we let it happen at all?" said Caspian. 
Suddenly all the shouting on both sides died down. Edmund was puzzled for a moment. Then he said, 
"Oh, I see. They've both agreed to a rest. Come on, Doctor. You and I may be able to do something for 
the High King.' They ran down to the lists and Peter came outside the ropes to meet them, his face red and 
sweaty, his chest heaving. 
"Is your left arm wounded?" asked Edmund. 
"It's not exactly a wound," Peter said. "I got the weight of his shoulder on my shield - like a load of 
bricks and the rim of the shield drove into my wrist. I don't think it's broken, but it might be a sprain. If 
you could tie it up very tight I think I could manage." 
While they were doing this, Edmund asked anxiously. "What do you think of him, Peter?" 
"Tough," said Peter. "Very tough. I have a chance if can keep him on the hop till his weight and short 
wind come against him - in this hot sun too. To tell the truth, I haven't much chance else. Give my love to 
- to everyone at home, Ed, if he gets me. Here he comes into the lists again 
So long, old chap. Good-bye, Doctor. And I say, Ed, say something specially nice to Trumpkin. He's 
been a brick." 

Edmund couldn't speak. He walked back with the Doctor to his own lines with a sick feeling in his 
stomach. 
But the new bout went well. Peter now seemed to be able to make some use of his shield, and he 
certainly made good use of his feet. He was almost playing Tig with Miraz now, keeping out of range, 
shifting his ground, making the enemy work. 
"Coward!" booed the Telmarines. "Why don't you stand up to him? Don't you like it, eh? Thought you'd 
come to fight, not dance. Yah!" 
"Oh, I do hope he won't listen to them," said Caspian. 
"Not he," said Edmund. "You don't know him - Oh!" for Miraz had got in a blow at last, on Peter's 
helmet. Peter staggered, slipped sideways, and fell on one knee. The roar of the Telmarines rose like the 
noise of the sea. "Now, Miraz," they yelled. "Now. Quick! Quick! Kill him." But indeed there was no 
need to egg the usurper on. He was on top of Peter already. Edmund bit his lips till the blood came, as the 
sword flashed down on Peter. It looked as if it would slash off his head. Thank heavens! It had glanced 
down his right shoulder. The Dwarf-wrought mail was sound and did not break. 
"Great Scott!" cried Edmund. "He's up again. Peter, go it, Peter." 
"I couldn't see what happened," said the Doctor. "How did he do it?" 
"Grabbed Miraz's arm as it came down," said Trumpkin, dancing with delight. "There's a man for you! 
Uses his enemy's arm as a ladder. The High King! The High King! Up, Old Narnia!" 
"Look," said Trufflehunter. "Miraz is angry. It is good." They were certainly at it hammer and tongs now: 
such a flurry of blows that it seemed impossible for either not to be killed. As the excitement grew, the 
shouting almost died away. The spectators were holding their breath. It was most horrible and most 
magnificent. 
A great shout arose from the Old Narnians. Miraz was a down - not struck by Peter, but face downwards, 

having tripped on a tussock. Peter stepped back, waiting for him to rise. 
"Oh bother, bother, bother," said Edmund to himself. "Need he be as gentlemanly as all that? I suppose 
he must. Comes of being a Knight and a High King. I suppose it is what Aslan would like. But that brute 
will be up again in a minute and then -" 
But "that brute" never rose. The Lords Glozelle and Sopespian had their own plans ready. As soon as 
they saw their King down they leaped into the lists crying, "Treachery! Treachery! The Narnian traitor has 
stabbed him in the back while he lay helpless. To arms! To arms, Telmar!" 
Peter hardly understood what was happening. He saw two big men running towards him with drawn 
swords. Then the third Telmarine had leaped over the ropes on his; left. "To arms, Narnia! Treachery!" 
Peter shouted. If all three had set upon him at once he would never have spoken again. But Glozelle 
stopped to stab his own King dead where he lay: "That's for your insult, this morning," he whispered as 
the blade went home. Peter swung to face Sopespian, slashed his legs from under him and, with the backcut 
of the same stroke, walloped off his head Edmund was now at his side crying, "Narnia, Narnia! The 
Lion!" The whole Telmarine army was rushing toward them. But now the Giant was stamping forward, 
stooping low and swinging his club. The Centaurs charged. Twang, twang behind and hiss, hiss overhead 
came the archery of Dwarfs. Trumpkin was fighting at his left. Full battle was joined. 
"Come back, Reepicheep, you little ass!" shouted Peter. "You'll only be killed. This is no place for 
mice." But the ridiculous little creatures were dancing in and out among the feet of both armies, jabbing 
with their swords. Many a Telmarine warrior that day felt his foot suddenly pierced as if by a dozen 
skewers, hopped on one leg cursing the pain, and fell as often as not. If he fell, the mice finished him off; 
if he did not, someone else did. 
But almost before the Old Narnians were really warmed to their work they found the enemy giving way. 
Toughlooking warriors turned white, gazed in terror not on the Old Narnians but on something behind 
them, and then flung down their weapons, shrieking, "The Wood! The Wood! The end of the world!" 
But soon neither their cries nor the sound of weapons could be heard any more, for both were drowned in 
the ocean-like roar of the Awakened Trees as they plunged through the ranks of Peter's army, and then on, 
in pursuit of the Telmarines. Have you ever stood at the edge of a great wood on a high ridge when a wild 
south-wester broke over it in full fury on an autumn evening? Imagine that sound. And then imagine that 
the wood, instead of being fixed to one place, was rushing at you; and was no longer trees but huge 
people; yet still like trees because their long arms waved like branches and their heads tossed and leaves 
fell round them in showers. It was like that for the Telmarines. It was a little alarming even for the 
Narnians. In a few minutes all Miraz's followers were running down to the Great River in the hope of 

crossing the bridge to the town of Beruna and there defending themselves behind ramparts and closed 
gates. 
They reached the river, but there was no bridge. It had disappeared since yesterday. Then utter panic and 
horror fell upon them and they all surrendered. 
But what had happened to the bridge? 
Early that morning, after a few hours' sleep, the girls had waked, to see Aslan standing over them and to 
hear his voice saying, "We will make holiday." They rubbed their eyes and looked round them. The trees 
had all gone but could still be seen moving away towards Aslan's How in a dark mass. Bacchus and the 
Maenads - his fierce, madcap girls - and Silenus were still with them. Lucy, fully rested, jumped up. 
Everyone was awake, everyone was laughing, flutes were playing, cymbals clashing. Animals, not 
Talking Animals, were crowding in upon them from every direction. 
"What is it, Aslan?" said Lucy, her eyes dancing and her feet wanting to dance. 
"Come, children," said he. "Ride on my back again today." 
"Oh, lovely!" cried Lucy, and both girls climbed on to the warm golden back as they had done no one 
knew how many years before. Then the whole party moved off Aslan leading, Bacchus and his Maenads 
leaping, rushing, and turning somersaults, the beasts frisking round them, and Silenus and his donkey 
bringing up the rear. 
They turned a little to the right, raced down a steep hill, and found the long Bridge of Beruna in front of 
them. Before they had begun to cross it, however, up out of the water came a great wet, bearded head, 
larger than a man's, crowned with rushes. It looked at Aslan and out of its mouth a deep voice came. 
"Hail, Lord," it said. "Loose my chains." 
"Who on earth is that?" whispered Susan. 

"I think it's the river-god, but hush," said Lucy. 
"Bacchus," said Aslan. "Deliver him from his chains." 
"That means the bridge, I expect," thought Lucy. And so it did. Bacchus and his people splashed forward 
into the shallow water, and a minute later the most curious things began happening. Great, strong trunks 
of ivy came curling up all the piers of the bridge, growing as quickly as a fire grows, wrapping the stones 
round, splitting, breaking, separating them. The walls of the bridge turned into hedges gay with hawthorn 
for a moment and then disappeared as the whole thing with a rush and a rumble collapsed into the 
swirling water. With much splashing, screaming, and laughter the revellers waded or swam or danced 
across the ford ("Hurrah! It's the Ford of Beruna again now!" cried the girls) and up the bank on the far 
side and into the town. 
Everyone in the streets fled before their faces. The first house they came to was a school: a girls' school, 
where lot of Narnian girls, with their hair done very tight and ugly tight collars round their necks and 
thick tickly stockings on their legs, were having a history lesson. The sort of "History" that was taught in 
Narnia under Miraz's rule was duller than the truest history you ever read and less true than the most 
exciting adventure story. 
"If you don't attend, Gwendolen," said the mistress, and stop looking out of the window, I shall have to 
give you an order-mark." 
"But please, Miss Prizzle -" began Gwendolen. 
"Did you hear what I said, Gwendolen?" asked Miss Prizzle. 
"But please, Miss Prizzle," said Gwendolen, "there's a LION!" 
"Take two order-marks for talking nonsense," said Miss Prizzle. "And now -" A roar interrupted her. Ivy 
came curling in at the windows of the classroom. The walls became a mass of shimmering green, and 
leafy branches arched overhead where the ceiling had been. Miss Prizzle found she was standing on grass 
in a forest glade. She clutched at her desk to steady herself, and found that the desk was a rose-bush. Wild 

people such as she had never even imagined were crowding round her. Then she saw the Lion, screamed 
and fled, and with her fled her class, who were mostly dumpy, prim little girls with fat legs. Gwendolen 
hesitated. 
"You'll stay with us, sweetheart?" said Aslan. 
"Oh, may I? Thank you, thank you," said Gwendolen. Instantly she joined hands with two of the 
Maenads, who whirled her round in a merry dance and helped her take off some of the unnecessary and 
uncomfortable clothes that she was wearing. 
Wherever they went in the little town of Beruna it was the same. Most of the people fled, a few joined 
them. When they left the town they were a larger and a merrier company. 
They swept on across the level fields on the north bank, or left bank, of the river. At every farm animals 
came out to join them. Sad old donkeys who had never known joy grew suddenly young again; chained 
dogs broke their chains; horses kicked their carts to pieces and came trotting along with them - clop-clop - 
kicking up the mud and whinnying. 
At a well in a yard they met a man who was beating a boy. The stick burst into flower in the man's hand. 
He tried to drop it, but it stuck to his hand. His arm became a branch, his body the trunk of a tree, his feet 
took root. The boy, who had been crying a moment before, burst out laughing and joined them. 
At a little town half-way to Beaversdam, where two rivers met, they came to another school, where a 
tiredlooking girl was teaching arithmetic to a number of boys who looked very like pigs. She looked out 
of the window and saw the divine revellers singing up the street and a stab of joy went through her heart. 
Aslan stopped right under the window and looked up at her. 
"Oh, don't, don't," she said. "I'd love to. But I mustn't. I must stick to my work. And the children would 
be frightened if they saw you." 
"Frightened?" said the most pig-like of the boys. "Who's she talking to out of the window? Let's tell the 
inspector she talks to people out of the window when she ought to be teaching us." 

"Let's go and see who it is," said another boy, and they all came crowding to the window. But as soon as 
their mean little faces looked out, Bacchus gave a great cry of Euan, euoi-oi-oi-of and the boys all began 
howling with fright and trampling one another down to get out of the door and jumping out of the 
windows. And it was said afterwards (whether truly or not) that those particular little boys were never 
seen again, but that there were a lot of very fine little pigs in that part of the country which had never been 
there before. 
"Now, Dear Heart," said Aslan to the Mistress, and she jumped down and joined them. 
At Beaversdam they re-crossed the river and came east again along the southern bank. They came to a 
little cottage where a child stood in the doorway crying. "Why are you crying, my love?" asked Aslan. 
The child, who had never seen a picture of a lion, was not afraid of him. "Auntie's very ill," she said. 
"She's going to die." Then Aslan went to go in at the door of the cottage, but it was too small for him. So, 
when he had got his head through, he pushed with his shoulders (Lucy and Susan fell off when he did 
this) and lifted the whole house up and it fell backwards and apart. And there, still in her bed, though the 
bed was now in the open air, lay a little old woman who looked as if she had Dwarf blood in her. She was 
at death's door, but when she opened her eyes and saw the bright, hairy head of the lion staring into her 
face, she did not scream or faint. She said, "Oh, Aslan! I knew it was true. I've been waiting for this all 
my life. Have you come to take me away?" 
"Yes, Dearest," said Aslan. "But not the long journey yet." And as he spoke, like the flush creeping along 
the underside of a cloud at sunrise, the colour came back to her white face and her eyes grew bright and 
she sat up and said, "Why, I do declare I feel that better. I think I could take a little breakfast this 
morning." 
"Here you are, mother," said Bacchus, dipping a pitcher in the cottage well and handing it to her. But 
what was in it now was not water but the richest wine, red as red-currant jelly, smooth as oil, strong as 
beef, warming as tea, cool as dew. 
"Eh, you've done something to our well," said the old woman. "That makes a nice change, that does." 
And she jumped out of bed. 
"Ride on me," said Aslan, and added to Susan and Lucy, "You two queens will have to run now." 
"But we'd like that just as well," said Susan. And off they went again. 

And so at last, with leaping and dancing and singing, with music and laughter and roaring and barking 
and neighing, they all came to the place where Miraz's army stood flinging down their swords and holding 
up their hands, and Peter's army, still holding their weapons and breathing hard, stood round them with 
stern and glad faces. And the first thing that happened was that the old woman slipped off Aslan's back 
and ran across to Caspian and they embraced one another; for she was his old nurse. 
AT the sight of Aslan the cheeks of the Telmarine soldiers became the colour of cold gravy, their knees 
knocked together, and many fell on their faces. They had not believed in lions and this made their fear 
greater. Even the Red Dwarfs, who knew that he came as a friend, stood with open mouths and could not 
speak. Some of the Black Dwarfs, who had been of Nikabrik's party, began to edge away. But all the 
Talking Beasts surged round the Lion, with purrs and grunts and squeaks and whinneys of delight, 
fawning on him with their tails, rubbing against him, touching him reverently with their noses and going 
to and fro under his body and between his legs. If you have ever seen a little cat loving a big dog whom it 
knows and trusts, you will have a pretty good picture of their behaviour. Then Peter, leading Caspian, 
forced his way through the crowd of animals. 
"This is Caspian, Sir," he said. And Caspian knelt and kissed the Lion's paw. 
"Welcome, Prince," said Aslan. "Do you feel yourself sufficient to take up the Kingship of Narnia?" 
"I - I don't think I do, Sir," said Caspian. "I'm only a kid." 
"Good," said Aslan. "If you had felt yourself sufficient, it would have been a proof that you were not. 
Therefore, under us and under the High King, you shall be King of Narnia, Lord of Cair Paravel, and 

Emperor of the Lone Islands. You and your heirs while your race lasts. And your coronation - but what 
have we here?" For at that moment a curious little procession was approaching - eleven Mice, six of 
whom carried between them something on a litter made of branches, but the litter was no bigger than a 
large atlas. No one has ever seen mice more woebegone than these. They were plastered with mud some 
with blood too - and their ears were down and their whiskers drooped and their tails dragged in the grass, 
and their leader piped on his slender pipe a melancholy tune. On the litter lay what seemed little better 
than a damp heap of fur; all that was left of Reepicheep. He was still breathing, but more dead than alive, 
gashed with innumerable wounds, one paw crushed, and, where his tail had been, a bandaged stump. 
"Now, Lucy," said Aslan. 
Lucy had her diamond bottle out in a moment. Though only a drop was needed on each of Reepicheep's 
wounds, the wounds were so many that there was a long and anxious silence before she had finished and 
the Master Mouse sprang from the litter. His hand went at once to his sword hilt, with the other he twirled 
his whiskers. He bowed. 
"Hail, Aslan!" came his shrill voice. "I have the honour -" But then he suddenly stopped. 
The fact was that he still had no tail - whether that Lucy had forgotten it or that her cordial, though it 
could heal wounds, could not make things grow again. Reepicheep became aware of his loss as he made 
his bow; perhaps it altered something in his balance. He looked over his right shoulder. Failing to see his 
tail, he strained his neck further till he had to turn his shoulders and his whole body followed. But by that 
time his hind-quarters had turned too and were out of sight. Then he strained his neck looking over his 
shoulder again, with the same result. Only after he had turned completely round three times did he realize 
the dreadful truth. 
"I am confounded," said Reepicheep to Aslan. "I am completely out of countenance. I must crave your 
indulgence for appearing in this unseemly fashion." 
"It becomes you very well, Small One," said Aslan. 
"All the same," replied Reepicheep, "if anything could be done... Perhaps her Majesty?" and here he 
bowed to Lucy. 

"But what do you want with a tail?" asked Aslan. 
"Sir," said the Mouse, "I can eat and sleep and die for my King without one. But a tail is the honour and 
glory of a Mouse." 
"I have sometimes wondered, friend," said Aslan, "whether you do not think too much about your 
honour." 
"Highest of all High Kings," said Reepicheep, "permit me to remind you that a very small size has been 
bestowed on us Mice, and if we did not guard our dignity, some (who weigh worth by inches) would 
allow themselves very unsuitable pleasantries at our expense. That is why I have been at some pains to 
make it known that no one who does not wish to feel this sword as near his heart as I can reach shall talk 
in my presence about Traps or Toasted Cheese or Candles: no, Sir - not the tallest fool in Narnia!" Here 
he glared very fiercely up at Wimbleweather, but the Giant, who was always a stage behind everyone else, 
had not yet discovered what was being talked about down at his feet, and so missed the point. 
"Why have your followers all drawn their swords, may I ask?" said Aslan. 
"May it please your High Majesty," said the second Mouse, whose name was Peepiceek, "we are all 
waiting to cut off our own tails if our Chief must go without his. We will not bear the shame of wearing 
an honour which is denied to the High Mouse." 
"Ah!" roared Aslan. "You have conquered me. You have great hearts. Not for the sake of your dignity, 
Reepicheep, but for the love that is between you and your people, and still more for the kindness your 
people showed me long ago when you ate away the cords that bound me on the Stone Table (and it was 
then, though you have long forgotten it, that you began to be Talking Mice), you shall have your tail 
again." 
Before Aslan had finished speaking the new tail was in its place. Then, at Aslan's command, Peter 
bestowed the Knighthood of the Order of the Lion on Caspian, and Caspian, as soon as he was knighted, 
himself bestowed it on Trufflehunter and Trumpkin and Reepicheep, and made Doctor Cornelius his Lord 
Chancellor, and confirmed the Bulgy Bear in his hereditary office of Marshal of the Lists. And there was 
great applause. 

After this the Telmarine soldiers, firmly but without taunts or blows, were taken across the ford and all 
put under lock and key in the town of Beruna and given beef and beer. They made a great fuss about 
wading in the river, for they all hated and feared running water just as much as they hated and feared 
woods and animals. But in the end the nuisance was over: and then the nicest parts of that long day began. 
Lucy, sitting close to Aslan and divinely comfortable, wondered what the trees were doing. At first she 
thought they were merely dancing; they were certainly going round slowly in two circles, one from left to 
right and the other from right to left. Then she noticed that they kept throwing something down in the 
centre of both circles. Sometimes she thought they were cutting off long strands of their hair; at other 
times it looked as if they were breaking off bits of their fingers - but, if so, they had plenty of fingers to 
spare and it did not hurt them. But whatever they were throwing down, when it reached the ground, it 
became brushwood or dry sticks. Then three or four of the Red Dwarfs came forward with their tinder 
boxes and set light to the pile, which first crackled, and then blazed, and finally roared as a woodland 
bonfire on midsummer night ought to do. And everyone sat down in a wide circle round it. 
Then Bacchus and Silenus and the Maenads began a dance, far wilder than the dance of the trees; not 
merely a dance for fun and beauty (though it was that too) but a magic dance of plenty, and where their 
hands touched, and where their feet fell, the feast came into existence sides of roasted meat that filled the 
grove with delicious smell, and wheaten cakes and oaten cakes, honey and many-coloured sugars and 
cream as thick as porridge and as smooth as still water, peaches, nectarines, pomegranates, pears, grapes, 
strawberries, raspberries pyramids and cataracts of fruit. Then, in great wooden cups and bowls and 
mazers, wreathed with ivy, came the wines; dark, thick ones like syrups of mulberry juice, and clear red 
ones like red jellies liquefied, and yellow wines and green wines and yellow-green and greenish-yellow. 
But for the tree people different fare was provided. When Lucy saw Clodsley Shovel and his moles 
scuffling up the turf in various places (which Bacchus had pointed out to them) and realized that the trees 
were going to eat earth it gave her rather a shudder. But when she saw the earths that were actually 
brought to them she felt quite different. They began with a rich brown loam that looked almost exactly 
like chocolate; so like chocolate, in fact, that Edmund tried a piece of it, but he did not find it at all nice. 
When the rich loam had taken the edge off their hunger, the trees turned to an earth of the kind you see in 
Somerset, which is almost pink. They said it was lighter and sweeter. At the cheese stage they had a 
chalky soil, and then went on to delicate confections of the finest gravels powdered with choice silver 
sand. They drank very little wine, and it made the Hollies very talkative: for the most part they quenched 
their thirst with deep draughts of mingled dew and rain, flavoured with forest flowers and the airy taste of 
the thinnest clouds. 
Thus Aslan feasted the Narnians till long after the sunset had died away, and the stars had come out; and 
the great fire, now hotter but less noisy, shone like a beacon in the dark woods, and the frightened 
Telmarines saw it from far away and wondered what it might mean. The best thing of all about this feast 
was that there was no breaking up or going away, but as the talk grew quieter and slower, one after 
another would begin to nod and finally drop off to sleep with feet towards the fire and good friends on 
either side, till at last there was silence all round the circle, and the chattering of water over stone at the 

Ford of Beruna could be heard once more. But all night Aslan and the Moon gazed upon each other with 
joyful and unblinking eyes. 
Next day messengers (who were chiefly squirrels and birds) were sent all over the country with a 
proclamation to the scattered Telmarines - including, of course, the prisoners in Beruna. They were told 
that Caspian was now King and that Narnia would henceforth belong to the Talking Beasts and the 
Dwarfs and Dryads and Fauns and other creatures quite as much as to the men. Any who chose to stay 
under the new conditions might do so; but for those who did not like the idea, Aslan would provide 
another home. Anyone who wished to go there must come to Aslan and the Kings at the Ford of Beruna 
by noon on the fifth day. You may imagine that this caused plenty of head-scratching among the 
Telmarines. Some of them, chiefly the young ones, had, like Caspian, heard stories of the Old Days and 
were delighted that they had come back. They were already making friends with the creatures. These all 
decided to stay in Narnia. But most of the older men, especially those who had been important under 
Miraz, were sulky and had no wish to live in a country where they could not rule the roost. "Live here 
with a lot of blooming performing animals! No fear," they said. "And ghosts too," some added with a 
shudder. "That's what those there Dryads really are. It's not canny." They were also suspicious. "I don't 
trust 'em," they said. "Not with that awful Lion and all. He won't keep his claws off us long, you'll see." 
But then they were equally suspicious of his offer to give them a new home. "Take us off to his den and 
eat us one by one most likely," they muttered. And the more they talked to one another the sulkier and 
more suspicious they became. But on the appointed day more than half of them turned up. 
At one end of the glade Aslan had caused to be set up two stakes of wood, higher than a man's head and 
about three feet apart. A third, and lighter, piece of wood was bound across them at the top, uniting them, 
so that the whole thing looked like a doorway from nowhere into nowhere. In front of this stood Aslan 
himself with Peter on his right and Caspian on his left. Grouped round them were Susan and Lucy, 
Trumpkin and Trufflehunter, the Lord Cornelius, Glenstorm, Reepicheep, and others. The children and 
the Dwarfs had made good use of the royal wardrobes in what had been the castle of Miraz and was now 
the castle of Caspian, and what with silk and cloth of gold, with snowy linen glancing through slashed 
sleeves, with silver mail shirts and jewelled sword-hilts, with gilt helmets and feathered bonnets, they 
were almost too bright to look at. Even the beasts wore rich chains about their necks. Yet nobody's eyes 
were on them or the children. The living and strokable gold of Aslan's mane outshone them all. The rest 
of the Old Narnians stood down each side of the glade. At the far end stood the Telmarines. The sun 
shone brightly and pennants fluttered in the light wind. 
"Men of Telmar," said Aslan, "you who seek a new land, hear my words. I will send you all to your own 
country, which I know and you do not." 
"We don't remember Telmar. We don't know where it is. We don't know what it is like," grumbled the 
Telmarines. 

"You came into Narnia out of Telmar," said Aslan. "But you came into Telmar from another place. You 
do not belong to this world at all. You came hither, certain generations ago, out of that same world to 
which the High King Peter belongs." 
At this, half the Telmarines began whimpering, "There you are. Told you so. He's going to kill us all, 
send us right out of the world," and the other half began throwing out their chests and slapping one 
another on the back and whispering, "There you are. Might have guessed we didn't belong to this place 
with all its queer, nasty, unnatural creatures. We're of royal blood, you'll see." And even Caspian and 
Cornelius and the children turned to Aslan with looks of amazement on their faces. 
"Peace," said Aslan in the low voice which was nearest to his growl. The earth seemed to shake a little 
and every living thing in the grove became still as stone. 
"You, Sir Caspian," said Aslan, "might have known that you could be no true King of Narnia unless, like 
the Kings of old, you were a son of Adam and came from the world of Adam's sons. And so you are. 
Many years ago in that world, in a deep sea of that world which is called the South Sea, a shipload of 
pirates were driven by storm on an island. And there they did as pirates would: killed the natives and took 
the native women for wives, and made palm wine, and drank and were drunk, and lay in the shade of the 
palm trees, and woke up and quarrelled, and sometimes killed one another. And in one of these frays six 
were put to flight by the rest and fled with their women into the centre of the island and up a mountain, 
and went, as they thought, into a cave to hide. But it was one of the magical places of that world, one of 
the chinks or chasms between chat world and this. There were many chinks or chasms between worlds in 
old times, but they have grown rarer. This was one of the last: I do not say the last. And so they fell, or 
rose, or blundered, or dropped right through, and found themselves in this world, in the Land of Telmar 
which was then unpeopled. But why it was unpeopled is a long story: I will not tell it now. And in Telmar 
their descendants lived and became a fierce and proud people; and after many generations there was a 
famine in Telmar and they invaded Narnia, which was then in some disorder (but that also would be a 
long story), and conquered it and ruled it. Do you mark all this well, King Caspian?" 
"I do indeed, Sir," said Caspian. "I was wishing that I came of a more honourable lineage." 
"You come of the Lord Adam and the Lady Eve," said Aslan. "And that is both honour enough to erect 
the head of the poorest beggar, and shame enough to bow the shoulders of the greatest emperor on earth. 
Be content." 
Caspian bowed. 

"And now," said Aslan, "you men and women of Telmar, will you go back to that island in the world of 
men from which your fathers first came? It is no bad place. The race of those pirates who first found it has 
died out, and it is without inhabitants. There are good wells of fresh water, and fruitful soil, and timber for 
building, and fish in the lagoons; and the other men of that world have not yet discovered it. The chasm is 
open for your return; but this I must warn you, that once you have gone through, it will close behind you 
for ever. There will be no more commerce between the worlds by that door." 
There was silence for a moment. Then a burly, decent looking fellow among the Telmarine soldiers 
pushed forward and said: 
"Well, I'll take the offer." 
"It is well chosen," said Aslan. "And because you have spoken first, strong magic is upon you. Your 
future in that world shall be good. Come forth." 
The man, now a little pale, came forward. Aslan and his court drew aside, leaving him free access to the 
empty doorway of the stakes. 
"Go through it, my son," said Aslan, bending towards him and touching the man's nose with his own. As 
soon as the Lion's breath came about him, a new look came into the man's eyes - startled, but not unhappy 
- as if he were trying to remember something. Then he squared his shoulders and walked into the Door. 
Everyone's eyes were fixed on him. They saw the three pieces of wood, and through them the trees and 
grass and sky of Narnia. They saw the man between the doorposts: then, in one second, he had vanished 
utterly. 
From the other end of the glade the remaining Telmarines set up a wailing. "Ugh! What's happened to 
him? Do you mean to murder us? We won't go that way." And then one of the clever Telmarines said: 
"We don't see any other world through those sticks. If you want us to believe in it, why doesn't one of 
you go? All your own friends are keeping well away from the sticks." 

Instantly Reepicheep stood forward and bowed. "If my example can be of any service, Aslan," he said, "I 
will take eleven mice through that arch at your bidding without a moment's delay." 
"Nay, little one," said Aslan, laying his velvety paw ever so lightly on Reepicheep's head. "They would 
do dreadful things to you in that world. They would show you at fairs. It is others who must lead." 
"Come on," said Peter suddenly to Edmund and Lucy. "Our time's up." 
"What do you mean?" said Edmund. 
"This way," said Susan, who seemed to know all about it. "Back into the trees. We've got to change." 
"Change what?" asked Lucy. 
"Our clothes, of course," said Susan. "Nice fools we'd look on the platform of an English station in 
these." 
"But our other things are at Caspian's castle," said Edmund. 
"No, they're not," said Peter, still leading the way into the thickest wood. "They're all here. They were 
brought down in bundles this morning. It's all arranged." 
"Was that what Aslan was talking to you and Susan about this morning?" asked Lucy. 
"Yes - that and other things," said Peter, his face very solemn. "I can't tell it to you all. There were things 
he wanted to say to Su and me because we're not coming back to Narnia." 

"Never?" cried Edmund and Lucy in dismay. 
"Oh, you two are," answered Peter. "At least, from what he said, I'm pretty sure he means you to get 
back some day. But not Su and me. He says we're getting too old." 
"Oh, Peter," said Lucy. "What awful bad luck. Can you bear it?" 
"Well, I think I can," said Peter. "It's all rather different from what I thought. You'll understand when it 
comes to your last time. But, quick, here are our things." 
It was odd, and not very nice, to take off their royal clothes and to come back in their school things (not 
very fresh now) into that great assembly. One or two of the nastier Telmarines jeered. But the other 
creatures all cheered and rose up in honour of Peter the High King, and Queen Susan of the Horn, and 
King Edmund, and Queen Lucy. There were affectionate and (on Lucy's part) tearful farewells with all 
their old friends - animal kisses, and hugs from Bulgy Bears, and hands wrung by Trumpkin, and a last 
tickly, whiskerish embrace with Trufflehunter. And of course Caspian offered the Horn back to Susan and 
of course Susan told him to keep it. And then, wonderfully and terribly, it was farewell to Aslan himself, 
and Peter took his place with Susan's hands on his shoulders and Edmund's on hers and Lucy's on his and 
the first of the Telmarine's on Lucy's, and so in a long line they moved forward to the Door. After that 
came a moment which is hard to describe, for the children seemed to be seeing three things at once. One 
was the mouth of a cave opening into the glaring green and blue of an island in the Pacific, where all the 
Telmarines would find themselves the moment they were through the Door. The second was a glade in 
Narnia, the faces of Dwarfs and Beasts, the deep eyes of Aslan, and the white patches on the Badger's 
cheeks. But the third (which rapidly swallowed up the other two) was the grey, gravelly surface of a 
platform in a country station, and a seat with luggage round it, where they were all sitting as if they had 
never moved from it - a little flat and dreary for a moment after all they; had been through, but also, 
unexpectedly, nice in its own way, what with the familiar railway smell and the English sky and the 
summer term before them. 
"Well!" said Peter. "We have had a time." 
"Bother!" said Edmund. "I've left my new torch in Narnia." 
THIS is the story of an adventure that happened in Narnia and Calormen and the lands between, in the 
Golden Age when Peter was High King in Narnia and his brother and his two sisters were King and 
Queens under him. 
In those days, far south in Calormen on a little creek of the sea, there lived a poor fisherman called 
Arsheesh, and with him there lived a boy who called him Father. The boy's name was Shasta. On most 
days Arsheesh went out in his boat to fish in the morning, and in the afternoon he harnessed his donkey to 
a cart and loaded the cart with fish and went a mile or so southward to the village to sell it. If it had sold 
well he would come home in a moderately good temper and say nothing to Shasta, but if it had sold badly 
he would find fault with him and perhaps beat him. There was always something to find fault with for 
Shasta had plenty of work to do, mending and washing the nets, cooking the supper, and cleaning the 
cottage in which they both lived. 
Shasta was not at all interested in anything that lay south of his home because he had once or twice been 
to the village with Arsheesh and he knew that there was nothing very interesting there. In the village he 
only met other men who were just like his father - men with long, dirty robes, and wooden shoes turned 
up at the toe, and turbans on their heads, and beards, talking to one another very slowly about things that 
sounded dull. But he was very interested in everything that lay to the North because no one ever went that 
way and he was never allowed to go there himself. When he was sitting out of doors mending the nets, 
and all alone, he would often look eagerly to the North. One could see nothing but a grassy slope running 
up to a level ridge and beyond that the sky with perhaps a few birds in it. 
Sometimes if Arsheesh was there Shasta would say, "O my Father, what is there beyond that hill?" And 
then if the fisherman was in a bad temper he would box Shasta's ears and tell him to attend to his work. Or 
if he was in a peaceable mood he would say, "O my son, do not allow your mind to be distracted by idle 
questions. For one of the poets has said, `Application to business is the root of prosperity, but those who 
ask questions that do not concern them are steering the ship of folly towards the rock of indigence'." 
Shasta thought that beyond the hill there must be some delightful secret which his father wished to hide 
from him. In reality, however, the fisherman talked like this because he didn't know what lay to the North. 
Neither did he care. He had a very practical mind. 
One day there came from the South a stranger who was unlike any man that Shasta had seen before. He 
rode upon a strong dappled horse with flowing mane and tail and his stirrups and bridle were inlaid with 
silver. The spike of a helmet projected from the middle of his silken turban and he wore a shirt of chain 
mail. By his side hung a curving scimitar, a round shield studded with bosses of brass hung at his back, 

and his right hand grasped a lance. His face was dark, but this did not surprise Shasta because all the 
people of Calormen are like that; what did surprise him was the man's beard which was dyed crimson, and 
curled and gleaming with scented oil. But Arsheesh knew by the gold on the stranger's bare arm that he 
was a Tarkaan or great lord, and he bowed kneeling before him till his beard touched the earth and made 
signs to Shasta to kneel also. 
The stranger demanded hospitality for the night which of course the fisherman dared not refuse. All the 
best they had was set before the Tarkaan for supper (and he didn't think much of it) and Shasta, as always 
happened when the fisherman had company, was given a hunk of bread and turned out of the cottage. On 
these occasions he usually slept with the donkey in its little thatched stable. But it was much too early to 
go to sleep yet, and Shasta, who had never learned that it is wrong to listen behind doors, sat down with 
his ear to a crack in the wooden wall of the cottage to hear what the grown-ups were talking about. And 
this is what he heard. 
"And now, O my host," said the Tarkaan, "I have a mind to buy that boy of yours." 
"O my master," replied the fisherman (and Shasta knew by the wheedling tone the greedy look that was 
probably coming into his face as he said it), "what price could induce your servant, poor though he is, to 
sell into slavery his only child and his own flesh? Has not one of the poets said, `Natural affection is 
stronger than soup and offspring more precious than carbuncles?"' 
"It is even so," replied the guest dryly. "But another poet has likewise said, "He who attempts to deceive 
the judicious is already baring his own back for the scourge." Do not load your aged mouth with 
falsehoods. This boy is manifestly no son of yours, for your cheek is as dark as mine but the boy is fair 
and white like the accursed but beautiful barbarians who inhabit the remote North." 
"How well it was said," answered the fisherman, "that Swords can be kept off with shields but the Eye of 
Wisdom pierces through every defence! Know then, O my formidable guest, that because of my extreme 
poverty I have never married and have no child. But in that same year in which the Tisroc (may he live for 
ever) began his august and beneficent reign, on a night when the moon was at her full, it pleased the gods 
to deprive me of my sleep. Therefore I arose from my bed in this hovel and went forth to the beach to 
refresh myself with looking upon the water and the moon and breathing the cool air. And presently I 
heard a noise as of oars coming to me across the water and then, as it were, a weak cry. And shortly after, 
the tide brought to the land a little boat in which there was nothing but a man lean with extreme hunger 
and thirst who seemed to have died but a few moments before (for he was still warm), and an empty 
water-skin, and a child, still living. "Doubtless," said I, "these unfortunates have escaped from the wreck 
of a great ship, but by the admirable designs of the gods, the elder has starved himself to keep the child 
alive and has perished in sight of land." Accordingly, remembering how the gods never fail to reward 
those who befriend the destitute, and being moved by compassion (for your servant is a man of tender 
heart) -" 

"Leave out all these idle words in your own praise," interrupted the Tarkaan. "It is enough to know that 
you took the child - and have had ten times the worth of his daily bread out of him in labour, as anyone 
can see. And now tell me at once what price you put on him, for I am wearied with your loquacity." 
"You yourself have wisely said," answered Arsheesh, "that the boy's labour has been to me of inestimable 
value. This must be taken into account in fixing the price. For if I sell the boy I must undoubtedly either 
buy or hire another to do his work." 
"I'll give you fifteen crescents for him," said the Tarkaan. 
"Fifteen!" cried Arsheesh in a voice that was something between a whine and a scream. "Fifteen! For the 
prop of my old age and the delight of my eyes! Do not mock my grey beard, Tarkaan though you be. My 
price is seventy." 
At this point Shasta got up and tiptoed away. He had heard all he wanted, for he had open listened when 
men were bargaining in the village and knew how it was done. He was quite certain that Arsheesh would 
sell him in the end for something much more than fifteen crescents and much less than seventy, but that 
he and the Tarkaan would take hours in getting to an agreement. 
You must not imagine that Shasta felt at all as you and I would feel if we had just overheard our parents 
talking about selling us for slaves. For one thing, his life was already little better than slavery; for all he 
knew, the lordly stranger on the great horse might be kinder to him than Arsheesh. For another, the story 
about his own discovery in the boat had filled him with excitement and with a sense of relief. He had 
often been uneasy because, try as he might, he had never been able to love the fisherman, and he knew 
that a boy ought to love his father. And now, apparently, he was no relation to Arsheesh at all. That took a 
great weight off his mind. "Why, I might be anyone!" he thought. "I might be the son of a Tarkaan myself 
- or the son of the Tisroc (may he live for ever) or of a god!" 
He was standing out in the grassy place before the cottage while he thought these things. Twilight was 
coming on apace and a star or two was already out, but the remains of the sunset could still be seen in the 
west. Not far away the stranger's horse, loosely tied to an iron ring in the wall of the donkey's stable, was 
grazing. Shasta strolled over to it and patted its neck. It went on tearing up the grass and took no notice of 
him. 

Then another thought came into Shasta's mind. "I wonder what sort of a man that Tarkaan is," he said out 
loud. "It would be splendid if he was kind. Some of the slaves in a great lord's house have next to nothing 
to do. They wear lovely clothes and eat meat every day. Perhaps he'd take me to the wars and I'd save his 
life in a battle and then he'd set me free and adopt me as his son and give me a palace and a chariot and a 
suit of armour. But then he might be a horrid cruel man. He might send me to work on the fields in chains. 
I wish I knew. How can I know? I bet this horse knows, if only he could tell me." 
The Horse had lifted its head. Shasta stroked its smooth-as-satin nose and said, "I wish you could talk, 
old fellow." 
And then for a second he thought he was dreaming, for quite distinctly, though in a low voice, the Horse 
said, "But I can." 
Shasta stared into its great eyes and his own grew almost as big, with astonishment. 
"How ever did you learn to talk?" he asked. 
"Hush! Not so loud," replied the Horse. "Where I come from, nearly all the animals talk." 
"Wherever is that?" asked Shasta. 
"Narnia," answered the Horse. "The happy land of Narnia - Narnia of the heathery mountains and the 
thymy downs, Narnia of the many rivers, the plashing glens, the mossy caverns and the deep forests 
ringing with the hammers of the Dwarfs. Oh the sweet air of Narnia! An hour's life there is better than a 
thousand years in Calormen." It ended with a whinny that sounded very like a sigh. 
"How did you get here?" said Shasta. 
"Kidnapped," said the Horse. "Or stolen, or captured whichever you like to call it. I was only a foal at the 
time. My mother warned me not to range the Southern slopes, into Archenland and beyond, but I wouldn't 
heed her. And by the Lion's Mane I have paid for my folly. All these years I have been a slave to humans, 

hiding my true nature and pretending to be dumb and witless like their horses." 
"Why didn't you tell them who you were?" 
"Not such a fool, that's why. If they'd once found out I could talk they would have made a show of me at 
fairs and guarded me more carefully than ever. My last chance of escape would have been gone." 
"And why -" began Shasta, but the Horse interrupted him. 
"Now look," it said, "we mustn't waste time on idle questions. You want to know about my master the 
Tarkaan Anradin. Well, he's bad. Not too bad to me, for a war horse costs too much to be treated very 
badly. But you'd better be lying dead tonight than go to be a human slave in his house tomorrow." 
"Then I'd better run away," said Shasta, turning very pale. 
"Yes, you had," said the Horse. "But why not run away with me?" 
"Are you going to run away too?" said Shasta. 
"Yes, if you'll come with me," answered the Horse. "This is the chance for both of us. You see if I run 
away without a rider, everyone who sees me will say "Stray horse" and be after me as quick as he can. 
With a rider I've a chance to get through. That's where you can help me. On the other hand, you can't get 
very far on those two silly legs of yours (what absurd legs humans have!) without being overtaken. But on 
me you can outdistance any other horse in this country. That's where I can help you. By the way, I 
suppose you know how to ride?" 
"Oh yes, of course," said Shasta. "At least, I've ridden the donkey." 
"Ridden the what?" retorted the Horse with extreme contempt. (At least, that is what he meant. Actually 
it came out in a sort of neigh - "Ridden the wha-ha-ha-ha-ha." Talking horses always become more horsy 

in accent when they are angry.) 
"In other words," it continued, "you can't ride. That's a drawback. I'll have to teach you as we go along. If 
you can't ride, can you fall?" 
"I suppose anyone can fall," said Shasta. 
"1 mean can you fall and get up again without crying and mount again and fall again and yet not be afraid 
of falling?" 
"I - I'll try," said Shasta. "Poor little beast," said the Horse in a gentler tone. "I forget you're only a foal. 
We'll make a fine rider of you in time. And now - we mustn't start until those two in the but are asleep. 
Meantime we can make our plans. My Tarkaan is on his way North to the great city, to Tashbaan itself 
and the court of the Tisroc -" 
"I say," put in Shasta in rather a shocked voice, "oughtn't you to say `May he live for ever'?" 
"Why?" asked the Horse. "I'm a free Narnian. And why should I talk slaves' and fools' talk? I don't want 
him to live for ever, and I know that he's not going to live for ever whether I want him to or not. And I can 
see you're from the free North too. No more of this Southern jargon between you and me! And now, back 
to our plans. As I said, my human was on his way North to Tashbaan." 
"Does that mean we'd better go to the South?" 
"I think not," said the Horse. "You see, he thinks I'm dumb and witless like his other horses. Now if I 
really were, the moment I got loose I'd go back home to my stable and paddock; back to his palace which 
is two days' journey South. That's where he'll look for me. He'd never dream of my going on North on my 
own. And anyway he will probably think that someone in the last village who saw him ride through has 
followed us to here and stolen me." 
"Oh hurrah!" said Shasta. "Then we'll go North. I've been longing to go to the North all my life." 

"Of course you have," said the Horse. "That's because of the blood that's in you. I'm sure you're true 
Northern stock. But not too loud. I should think they'd be asleep soon now." 
"I'd better creep back and see," suggested Shasta. 
"That's a good idea," said the Horse. "But take care you're not caught." 
It was a good deal darker now and very silent except for the sound of the waves on the beach, which 
Shasta hardly noticed because he had been hearing it day and night as long as he could remember. The 
cottage, as he approached it, showed no light. When he listened at the front there was no noise. When he 
went round to the only window, he could hear, after a second or two, the familiar noise of the old 
fisherman's squeaky snore. It was funny to think that if all went well he would never hear it again. 
Holding his breath and feeling a little bit sorry, but much less sorry than he was glad, Shasta glided away 
over the grass and went to the donkey's stable, groped along to a place he knew where the key was 
hidden, opened the door and found the Horse's saddle and bridle which had been locked up there for the 
night. He bent forward and kissed the donkey's nose. "I'm sorry we can't take you," he said. 
"There you are at last," said the Horse when he got back to it. "I was beginning to wonder what had 
become of you." 
"I was getting your things out of the stable," replied Shasta. "And now, can you tell me how to put them 
on?" 
For the next few minutes Shasta was at work, very cautiously to avoid jingling, while the Horse said 
things like, "Get that girth a bit tighter," or "You'll find a buckle lower down," or "You'll need to shorten 
those stirrups a good bit." When all was finished it said: 
"Now; we've got to have reins for the look of the thing, but you won't be using them. Tie them to the 
saddle-bow: very slack so that I can do what I like with my head. And, remember - you are not to touch 
them." 
"What are they for, then?" asked Shasta. 

"Ordinarily they are for directing me," replied the Horse. "But as I intend to do all the directing on this 
journey, you'll please keep your hands to yourself. And there's another thing. I'm not going to have you 
grabbing my mane." 
"But I say," pleaded Shasta. "If I'm not to hold on by the reins or by your mane, what am I to hold on 
by?" 
"You hold on with your knees," said the Horse. "That's the secret of good riding. Grip my body between 
your knees as hard as you like; sit straight up, straight as a poker; keep your elbows in. And by the way, 
what did you do with the spurs?" 
"Put them on my heels, of course," said Shasta. "I do know that much." 
"Then you can take them off and put them in the saddlebag. We may be able to sell them when we get to 
Tashbaan. Ready? And now I think you can get up." 
"Ooh! You're a dreadful height," gasped Shasta after his first, and unsuccessful, attempt. 
"I'm a horse, that's all," was the reply. "Anyone would think I was a haystack from the way you're trying 
to climb up me! There, that's better. Now sit up and remember what I told you about your knees. Funny to 
think of me who has led cavalry charges and won races having a potato-sack like you in the saddle! 
However, off we go." It chuckled, not unkindly. 
And it certainly began their night journey with great caution. First of all it went just south of the 
fisherman's cottage to the little river which there ran into the sea, and took care to leave in the mud some 
very plain hoof-marks pointing South. But as soon as they were in the middle of the ford it turned 
upstream and waded till they were about a hundred yards farther inland than the cottage. Then it selected 
a nice gravelly bit of bank which would take no footprints and came out on the Northern side. Then, still 
at a walking pace, it went Northward till the cottage, the one tree, the donkey's stable, and the creek - 
everything, in fact, that Shasta had ever known - had sunk out of sight in the grey summer-night darkness. 
They had been going uphill and now were at the top of the ridge - that ridge which had always been the 
boundary of Shasta's known world. He could not see what was ahead except that it was all open and 
grassy. It looked endless: wild and lonely and free. 

"I say!" observed the Horse. "What a place for a gallop, eh!" 
"Oh don't let's," said Shasta. "Not yet. I don't know how to - please, Horse. I don't know your name." 
"Breehy-hinny-brinny-hooky-hah," said the Horse. 
"I'll never be able to say that," said Shasta. "Can I call you Bree?" 
"Well, if it's the best you can do, I suppose you must," said the Horse. "And what shall I call you?" 
"I'm called Shasta." 
"H'm," said Bree. "Well, now, there's a name that's really hard to pronounce. But now about this gallop. 
It's a good deal easier than trotting if you only knew, because you don't have to rise and fall. Grip with 
your knees and keep your eyes straight ahead between my ears. Don't look at the ground. If you think 
you're going to fall just grip harder and sit up straighter. Ready? Now: for Narnia and the North." 

IT was nearly noon on the following day when Shasta was wakened by something warm and soft moving 
over his face. He opened his eyes and found himself staring into the long face of a horse; its nose and lips 
were almost touching his. He remembered the exciting events of the previous night and sat up. But as he 
did so he groaned. 
"Ow, Bree," he gasped. "I'm so sore. All over. I can hardly move." 
"Good morning, small one," said Bree. "I was afraid you might feel a bit stiff. It can't be the falls. You 
didn't have more than a dozen or so, and it was all lovely, soft springy turf that must have been almost a 
pleasure to fall on. And the only one that might have been nasty was broken by that gorse bush. No: it's 
the riding itself that comes hard at first. What about breakfast? I've had mine." 
"Oh bother breakfast. Bother everything," said Shasta. "I tell you I can't move." But the horse nuzzled at 
him with its nose and pawed him gently with a hoof till he had to get up. And then he looked about him 
and saw where they were. Behind them lay a little copse. Before them the turf, dotted with white flowers, 
sloped down to the brow of a cliff. Far below them, so that the sound of the breaking waves was very 
faint, lay the sea. Shasta had never seen it from such a height and never seen so much of it before, nor 
dreamed how many colours it had. On either hand the coast stretched away, headland after headland, and 
at the points you could see the white foam running up the rocks but making no noise because it was so far 
off. There were gulls flying overhead and the heat shivered on the ground; it was a blazing day. But what 
Shasta chiefly noticed was the air. He couldn't think what was missing, until at last he realized that there 
was no smell of fish in it. For of course, neither in the cottage nor among the nets, had he ever been away 
from that smell in his life. And this new air was so delicious, and all his old life seemed so far away, that 
he forgot for a moment about his bruises and his aching muscles and said: 
"I say, Bree, didn't you say something about breakfast?" 
"Yes, I did," answered Bree. "I think you'll find something in the saddle-bags. They're over there on that 
tree where you hung them up last night - or early this morning, rather." 
They investigated the saddle-bags and the results were cheering- a meat pasty, only slightly stale, a lump 
of dried figs and another lump of green cheese, a little flask of wine, and some money; about forty 
crescents in all, which was more than Shasta had ever seen. 
While Shasta sat down - painfully and cautiously - with his back against a tree and started on the pasty, 
Bree had a few more mouthfuls of grass to keep him company. 

"Won't it be stealing to use the money?" asked Shasta. 
"Oh," said the Horse, looking up with its mouth full of grass, "I never thought of that. A free horse and a 
talking horse mustn't steal, of course. But I think it's all right. We're prisoners and captives in enemy 
country. That money is booty, spoil. Besides, how are we to get any food for you without it? I suppose, 
like all humans, you won't eat natural food like grass and oats." 
"I can't." 
"Ever tried?" 
"Yes, I have. I can't get it down at all. You couldn't either if you were me." 
"You're rum little creatures, you humans," remarked Bree. 
When Shasta had finished his breakfast (which was by far the nicest he had ever eaten), Bree said, "I 
think I'll have a nice roll before we put on that saddle again." And he proceeded to do so. "That's good. 
That's very good," he said, rubbing his back on the turf and waving all four legs in the air. "You ought to 
have one too, Shasta," he snorted. "It's most refreshing." 
But Shasta burst out laughing and said,"You do look funny when you're on your back!" 
"I look nothing of the sort," said Bree. But then suddenly he rolled round on his side, raised his head and 
looked hard at Shasta, blowing a little. 
"Does it really look funny?" he asked in an anxious voice. 

"Yes, it does," replied Shasta. "But what does it matter?" 
"You don't think, do you," said Bree, "that it might be a thing talking horses never do - a silly, clownish 
trick I've learned from the dumb ones? It would be dreadful to find, when I get back to Narnia, that I've 
picked up a lot of low, bad habits. What do you think, Shasta? Honestly, now. Don't spare my feelings. 
Should you think the real, free horses - the talking kind - do roll?" 
"How should I know? Anyway I don't think I should bother about it if I were you. We've got to get there 
first. Do you know the way?" 
"I know my way to Tashbaan. After that comes the desert. Oh, we'll manage the desert somehow, never 
fear. Why, we'll be in sight of the Northern mountains then. Think of it! To Narnia and the North! 
Nothing will stop us then. But I'd be glad to be past Tashbaan. You and I are safer away from cities." 
"Can't we avoid it?" 
"Not without going along way inland, and that would take us into cultivated land and main roads; and I 
wouldn't know the way. No, we'll just have to creep along the coast. Up here on the downs we'll meet 
nothing but sheep and rabbits and gulls and a few shepherds. And by the way, what about starting?" 
Shasta's legs ached terribly as he saddled Bree and climbed into the saddle, but the Horse was kindly to 
him and went at a soft pace all afternoon. When evening twilight came they dropped by steep tracks into a 
valley and found a village. Before they got into it Shasta dismounted and entered it on foot to buy a loaf 
and some onions and radishes. The Horse trotted round by the fields in the dusk and met Shasta at the far 
side. This became their regular plan every second night. 
These were great days for Shasta, and every day better than the last as his muscles hardened and he fell 
less often. Even at the end of his training Bree still said he sat like a bag of flour in the saddle. "And even 
if it was safe, young 'un, I'd be ashamed to be seen with you on the main road." But in spite of his rude 
words Bree was a patient teacher. No one can teach riding so well as a horse. Shasta learned to trot, to 
canter, to jump, and to keep his seat even when Bree pulled up suddenly or swung unexpectedly to the left 
or the right - which, as Bree told him, was a thing you might have to do at any moment in a battle. And 
then of course Shasta begged to be told of the battles and wars in which Bree had carried the Tarkaan. 
And Bree would tell of forced marches and the fording of swift rivers, of charges and of fierce fights 
between cavalry and cavalry when the war horses fought as well as the men, being all fierce stallions, 
trained to bite and kick, and to rear at the right moment so that the horse's weight as well as the rider's 

would come down on a enemy's crest in the stroke of sword or battleaxe. But Bree did not want to talk 
about the wars as often as Shasta wanted to hear about them. "Don't speak of them, youngster," he would 
say. "They were only the Tisroc's wars and I fought in them as a slave and a dumb beast. Give me the 
Narnian wars where I shall fight as a free Horse among my own people! Those will be wars worth talking 
about. Narnia and the North! Bra-ha-ha! Broo hoo!" 
Shasta soon learned, when he heard Bree talking like that, to prepare for a gallop. 
After they had travelled on for weeks and weeks past more bays and headlands and rivers and villages 
than Shasta could remember, there came a moonlit night when they started their journey at evening, 
having slept during the day. They had left the downs behind them and were crossing a wide plain with a 
forest about half a mile away on their left. The sea, hidden by low sandhills, was about the same distance 
on their right. They had jogged along for about an hour, sometimes trotting and sometimes walking, when 
Bree suddenly stopped. 
"What's up?" said Shasta. 
"S-s-ssh!" said Bree, craning his neck round and twitching his ears. "Did you hear something? Listen." 
"It sounds like another horse - between us and the wood," said Shasta after he had listened for about a 
minute. 
"It is another horse," said Bree. "And that's what I don't like." 
"Isn't it probably just a farmer riding home late?" said Shasta with a yawn. 
"Don't tell me!" said Bree. "That's not a farmer's riding. Nor a farmer's horse either. Can't you tell by the 
sound? That's quality, that horse is. And it's being ridden by a real horseman. I tell you what it is, Shasta. 
There's a Tarkaan under the edge of that wood. Not on his war horse - it's too light for that. On a fine 
blood mare, I should say." 
"Well, it's stopped now, whatever it is," said Shasta. 

"You're right," said Bree. "And why should he stop just when we do? Shasta, my boy, I do believe there's 
someone shadowing us at last." 
"What shall we do?" said Shasta in a lower whisper than before. "Do you think he can see us as well as 
hear us?" 
"Not in this light so long as we stay quite still," answered Bree. "But look! There's a cloud coming up. I'll 
wait till that gets over the moon. Then we'll get off to our right as quietly as we can, down to the shore. 
We can hide among the sandhills if the worst comes to the worst." 
They waited till the cloud covered the moon and then, first at a walking pace and afterwards at a gentle 
trot, made for the shore. 
The cloud was bigger and thicker than it had looked at first and soon the night grew very dark. Just as 
Shasta was saying to himself, "We must be nearly at those sandhills by now," his heart leaped into his 
mouth because an appalling noise had suddenly risen up out of the darkness ahead; a long snarling roar, 
melancholy and utterly savage. Instantly Bree swerved round and began galloping inland again as fast as 
he could gallop. 
"What is it?" gasped Shasta. 
"Lions!" said Bree, without checking his pace or turning his head. 
After that there was nothing but sheer galloping for some time. At last they splashed across a wide, 
shallow stream and Bree came to a stop on the far side. Shasta noticed that he was trembling and sweating 
all over. 
"That water may have thrown the brute off our scent," panted Bree when he had partly got his breath 
again. "We can walk for a bit now." 

As they walked Bree said, "Shasta, I'm ashamed of myself. I'm just as frightened as a common, dumb 
Calor mene horse. I am really. I don't feel like a Talking Horse at all. I don't mind swords and lances and 
arrows but I can't bear - those creatures. I think I'll trot for a bit." 
About a minute later, however, he broke into a gallop again, and no wonder. For the roar broke out again, 
this time on their left from the direction of the forest. 
"Two of them," moaned Bree. 
When they had galloped for several minutes without any further noise from the lions Shasta said, "I say! 
That other horse is galloping beside us now. Only a stone's throw away." 
"All the b-better," panted Bree. "Tarkaan on it - will have a sword - protect us all." 
"But, Bree!" said Shasta. "We might just as well be killed by lions as caught. Or 1 might. They'll hang me 
for horsestealing." He was feeling less frightened of lions than Bree because he had never met a lion; Bree 
had. 
Bree only snorted in answer but he did sheer away to his right. Oddly enough the other horse seemed also 
to be sheering away to the left, so that in a few seconds the space between them had widened a good deal. 
But as soon as it did so there came two more lions' roars, immediately after one another, one on the right 
and the other on the left, the horses began drawing nearer together. So, apparently, did the lions. The 
roaring of the brutes on each side was horribly close and they seemed to be keeping up with the galloping 
horses quite easily. Then the cloud rolled away. The moonlight, astonishingly bright, showed up 
everything almost as if it were broad day. The two horses and two riders were galloping neck to neck and 
knee to knee just as if they were in a race. Indeed Bree said (afterwards) that a finer race had never been 
seen in Calormen. 
Shasta now gave himself up for lost and began to wonder whether lions killed you quickly or played with 
you as a cat plays with a mouse and how much it would hurt. At the same time (one sometimes does this 
at the most frightful moments) he noticed everything. He saw that the other rider was a very small, slender 
person, mail-clad (the moon shone on the mail) and riding magnificently. He had no beard. 

Something flat and shining was spread out before them. Before Shasta had time even to guess what it was 
there was 
a great splash and he found his mouth half full of salt water. The shining thing had been a long inlet of 
the sea. Both horses were swimming and the water was up to Shasta's knees. There was an angry roaring 
behind them and looking back Shasta saw a great, shaggy, and terrible shape crouched on the water's 
edge; but only one. "We must have shaken off the other lion," he thought. 
The lion apparently did not think its prey worth a wetting; at any rate it made no attempt to take the water 
in pursuit. The two horses, side by side, were now well out into the middle of the creek and the opposite 
shore could be clearly seen. The Tarkaan had not yet spoken a word. "But he will," thought Shasta. "As 
soon as we have landed. What am I to say? I must begin thinking out a story." 
Then, suddenly, two voices spoke at his side. 
"Oh, I am so tired," said the one. "Hold your tongue, Hwin, and don't be a fool," said the other. 
"I'm dreaming," thought Shasta. "I could have sworn that other horse spoke." 
Soon the horses were no longer swimming but walking and soon with a great sound of water running off 
their sides and tails and with a great crunching of pebbles under eight hoofs, they came out on the farther 
beach of the inlet. The Tarkaan, to Shasta's surprise, showed no wish to ask questions. He did not even 
look at Shasta but seemed anxious to urge his horse straight on. Bree, however, at once shouldered 
himself in the other horse's way. 
"Broo-hoo-hah!" he snorted. "Steady there! I heard you, I did. There's no good pretending, Ma'am. 1 
heard you. You're a Talking Horse, a Narnian horse just like me." 
"What's it got to do with you if she is?" said the strange rider fiercely, laying hand on sword-hilt. But the 
voice in which the words were spoken had already told Shasta something. 
"Why, it's only a girl!" he exclaimed. 

"And what business is it of yours if I am only a girl?" snapped the stranger. "You're probably only a boy: 
a rude, common little boy - a slave probably, who's stolen his master's horse." 
"That's all you know," said Shasta. 
"He's not a thief, little Tarkheena," said Bree. "At least, if there's been any stealing, you might just as 
well say I stole him. And as for its not being my business, you wouldn't expect me to pass a lady of my 
own race in this strange country without speaking to her? It's only natural I should." 
"I think it's very natural too," said the mare. 
"I wish you'd held your tongue, Hwin," said the girl. "Look at the trouble you've got us into." 
"I don't know about trouble," said Shasta. "You can clear off as soon as you like. We shan't keep you." 
"No, you shan't," said the girl. 
"What quarrelsome creatures these humans are," said Bree to the mare. "They're as bad as mules. Let's try 
to talk a little sense. I take it, ma'am, your story is the same as mine? Captured in early youth - years of 
slavery among the Calormenes?" 
"Too true, sir," said the mare with a melancholy whinny. 
"And now, perhaps - escape?" 
"Tell him to mind his own business, Hwin," said the girl. 

"No, I won't, Aravis," said the mare putting her ears back. "This is my escape just as much as yours. And 
I'm sure a noble war-horse like this is not going to betray us. We are trying to escape, to get to Narnia." 
"And so, of course, are we," said Bree. "Of course you guessed that at once. A little boy in rags riding (or 
trying to ride) a war-horse at dead of night couldn't mean anything but an escape of some sort. And, if I 
may say so, a highborn Tarkheena riding alone at night - dressed up in her brother's armour - and very 
anxious for everyone to mind their own business and ask her no questions - well, if that's not fishy, call 
me a cob!" 
"All right then," said Aravis. "You've guessed it. Hwin and I are running away. We are trying to get to 
Narnia. And now, what about it?" 
"Why, in that case, what is to prevent us all going together?" said Bree. "I trust, Madam Hwin, you will 
accept such assistance and protection as I may be able to give you on the journey?" 
"Why do you keep talking to my horse instead of to me?" asked the girl. 
"Excuse me, Tarkheena," said Bree (with just the slightest backward tilt of his ears), "but that's 
Calormene talk. We're free Narnians, Hwin and I, and I suppose, if you're running away to Narnia, you 
want to be one too. In that case Hwin isn't your horse any longer. One might just as well say you're her 
human." 
The girl opened her mouth to speak and then stopped. Obviously she had not quite seen it in that light 
before. 
"Still," she said after a moment's pause, "I don't know that there's so much point in all going together. 
Aren't we more likely to be noticed?" 
"Less," said Bree; and the mare said, "Oh do let's. I should feel much more comfortable. We're not even 
certain of the way. I'm sure a great charger like this knows far more than we do." 

"Oh come on, Bree," said Shasta, "and let them go their own way. Can't you see they don't want us?" 
"We do," said Hwin. 
"Look here," said the girl. "I don't mind going with you, Mr War-Horse, but what about this boy? How 
do I know he's not a spy?" 
"Why don't you say at once that you think I'm not good enough for you?" said Shasta. 
"Be quiet, Shasta," said Bree. "The Tarkheena's question is quite reasonable. I'll vouch for the boy, 
Tarkheena. He's been true to me and a good friend. And he's certainly either a Narnian or an 
Archenlander." 
"All right, then. Let's go together." But she didn't say anything to Shasta and it was obvious that she 
wanted Bree, not him. 
"Splendid!" said Bree. "And now that we've got the water between us and those dreadful animals, what 
about you two humans taking off our saddles and our all having a rest and hearing one another's stories." 
Both the children unsaddled their horses and the horses had a little grass and Aravis produced rather nice 
things to eat from her saddle-bag„ But Shasta sulked and said No thanks, and that he wasn't hungry. And 
he tried to put on what he thought very grand and stiff manners, but as a fisherman's but is not usually a 
good place for learning grand manners, the result was dreadful. And he half knew that it wasn't a success 
and then became sulkier and more awkward than ever. Meanwhile the two horses were getting on 
splendidly. They remembered the very same places in Narnia - "the grasslands up above Beaversdam" and 
found that they were some sort of second cousins once removed. This made things more and more 
uncomfortable for the humans until at last Bree said, "And now, Tarkheena, tell us your story. And don't 
hurry it - I'm feeling comfortable now." 
Aravis immediately began, sitting quite still and using a rather different tone and style from her usual 
one. For in Calormen, story-telling (whether the stories are true or made up) is a thing you're taught, just 
as English boys and girls are taught essay-writing. The difference is that people want to hear the stories, 
whereas I never heard of anyone who wanted to read the essays. 

"Mr name," said the girl at once, "is Aravis Tarkheena and I am the only daughter of Kidrash Tarkaan, 
the son of Rishti Tarkaan, the son of Kidrash Tarkaan, the son of Ilsombreh Tisroc, the son of Ardeeb 
Tisroc who was descended in a right line from the god Tash. My father is the lord of the province of 
Calavar and is one who has the right of standing on his feet in his shoes before the face of Tisroc himself 
(may he live for ever). My mother (on whom be the peace of the gods) is dead and my father has married 
another wife. One of my brothers has fallen in battle against the rebels in the far west and the other is a 
child. Now it came to pass that my father's wife, my step-mother, hated me, and the sun appeared dark in 
her eyes as long as I lived in my father's house. And so she persuaded my father to promise me in 
marriage to Ahoshta Tarkaan. Now this Ahoshta is of base birth, though in these latter years he has won 
the favour of the Tisroc (may he live for ever) by flattery and evil counsels, and is now made a Tarkaan 
and the lord of many cities and is likely to be chosen as the Grand Vizier when the present Grand Vizier 
dies. Moreover he is at least sixty years old and has a hump on his back and his face resembles that of an 
ape. Nevertheless my father, because of the wealth and power of this Ahoshta, and being persuaded by his 
wife, sent messengers offering me in marriage, and the offer was favourably accepted and Ahoshta sent 
word that he would marry me this very year at the time of high summer. 
"When this news was brought to me the sun appeared dark in my eyes and I laid myself on my bed and 
wept for a day. But on the second day I rose up and washed my face and caused my mare Hwin to be 
saddled and took with me a sharp dagger which my brother had carried in the western wars and rode out 
alone. And when my father's house was out of sight and I was come to a green open place in a certain 
wood where there were no dwellings of men, I dismounted from Hwin my mare and took out the dagger. 
Then I parted my clothes where I thought the readiest way lay to my heart and I prayed to all the gods that 
as soon as I was dead I might find myself with my brother. After that I shut my eyes and my teeth and 
prepared to drive the dagger into my heart. But before I had done so, this mare spoke with the voice of 
one of the daughters of men and said, "O my mistress, do not by any means destroy yourself, for if you 
live you may yet have good fortune but all the dead are dead alike." 
"I didn't say it half so well as that," muttered the mare. 
"Hush, Ma'am, hush," said Bree, who was thoroughly enjoying the story. "She's telling it in the grand 

Calormene manner and no story-teller in a Tisroc's court could do it better. Pray go on, Tarkheena." 
"When I heard the language of men uttered by my mare," continued Aravis, "I said to myself, the fear of 
death has disordered my reason and subjected me to delusions. And I became full of shame for none of 
my lineage ought to fear death more than the biting of a gnat. Therefore I addressed myself a second time 
to the stabbing, but Hwin came near to me and put her head in between me and the dagger and discoursed 
to me most excellent reasons and rebuked me as a mother rebukes her daughter. And now my wonder was 
so great that I forgot about killing myself and about Ahoshta and said, `O my mare, how have you learned 
to speak like one of the daughters of men?' And Hwin told me what is known to all this company, that in 
Narnia there are beasts that talk, and how she herself was stolen from thence when she was a little foal. 
She told me also of the woods and waters of Narnia and the castles and the great ships, till I said, `In the 
name of Tash and Azaroth and Zardeenah Lady of the Night, I have a great wish to be in that country of 
Narnia.' `O my mistress,' answered the mare, `if you were in Narnia you would be happy, for in that land 
no maiden is forced to marry against her will.' 
"And when we had talked together for a great time hope returned to me and I rejoiced that I had not 
killed myself. Moreover it was agreed between Hwin and me that we should steal ourselves away together 
and we planned it in this fashion. We returned to my father's house and I put on my gayest clothes and 
sang and danced before my father and pretended to be delighted with the marriage which he had prepared 
for me. Also I said to him, `O my father and O the delight of my eyes, give me your licence and 
permission to go with one of my maidens alone for three days into the woods to do secret sacrifices to 
Zardeenah, Lady of the Night and of Maidens, as is proper and customary for damsels when they must bid 
farewell to the service of Zardeenah and prepare themselves for marriage.' And he answered, `O my 
daughter and O the delight of my eyes, so shall it be.' 
"But when I came out from the presence of my father I went immediately to the oldest of his slaves, his 
secretary, who had dandled me on his knees when I was a baby and loved me more than the air and the 
light. And I swore him to be secret and begged him to write a certain letter for me. And he wept and 
implored me to change my resolution but in the end he said, `To hear is to obey,' and did all my will. And 
I sealed the letter and hid it in my bosom." 
"But what was in the letter?" asked Shasta. 
"Be quiet, youngster," said Bree. "You're spoiling the story. She'll tell us all about the letter in the right 
place. Go on, Tarkheena." 
"Then I called the maid who was to go with me to the woods and perform the rites of Zardeenah and told 
her to wake me very early in the morning. And I became merry with her and gave her wine to drink; but I 

had mixed such things in her cup that I knew she must sleep for a night and a day. As soon as the 
household of my father had committed themselves to sleep I arose and put on an armour of my brother's 
which I always kept in my chamber in his memory. I put into my girdle all the money I had and certain 
choice jewels and provided myself also with food, and saddled the mare with my own hands and rode 
away in the second watch of the night. I directed my course not to the woods where my father supposed 
that I would go but north and east to Tashbaan. 
"Now for three days and more I knew that my father would not seek me, being deceived by the words I 
had said to him. And on the fourth day we arrived at the city of Azim Balda. Now Azim Balda stands at 
the meeting of many roads and from it the posts of the Tisroc (may he live for ever) ride on swift horses to 
every part of the empire: and it is one of the rights and privileges of the greater Tarkaans to send messages 
by them. I therefore went to the Chief of the Messengers in the House of Imperial Posts in Azim Balda 
and said, `O dispatcher of messages, here is a letter from my uncle Ahoshta Tarkaan to Kidrash Tarkaan 
lord of Calavar. Take now these five crescents and cause it to be sent to him.' And the Chief of the 
Messengers said, `To hear is to obey.' 
"This letter was feigned to be written by Ahoshta and this was the signification of the writing: `Ahoshta 
Tarkaan to Kidrash Tarkaan, salutation and peace. In the name of Tash the irresistible, the inexorable. Be 
it known to you that as I made my journey towards your house to perform the contract of marriage 
between me and your daughter Aravis Tarkheena, it pleased fortune and the gods that I fell in with her in 
the forest when she had ended the rites and sacrifices of Zardeenah according to the custom of maidens. 
And when I learned who she was, being delighted with her beauty and discretion, I became inflamed with 
love and it appeared to me that the sun would be dark to me if I did not marry her at once. Accordingly I 
prepared the necessary sacrifices and married your daughter the same hour that I met her and have 
returned with her to my own house. And we both pray and charge you to come hither as speedily as you 
may that we may be delighted with your face and speech; and also that you may bring with you the dowry 
of my wife, which, by reason of my great charges and expenses, I require without delay. And because 
thou and I are brothers I assure myself that you will not be angered by the haste of my marriage which is 
wholly occasioned by the great love I bear your daughter. And I commit you to the care of all the gods.' 
"As soon as I had done this I rode on in all haste from Azim Balda, fearing no pursuit and expecting that 
my father, having received such a letter, would send messages to Ahoshta or go to him himself, and that 
before the matter was discovered I should be beyond Tashbaan. And that is the pith of my story until this 
very night when I was chased by lions and met you at the swimming of the salt water." 
"And what happened to the girl - the one you drugged?" asked Shasta. 
"Doubtless she was beaten for sleeping late," said Aravis coolly. "But she was a tool and spy of my 
stepmother's. I am very glad they should beat her." 

"I say, that was hardly fair," said Shasta. 
"I did not do any of these things for the sake of pleasing you," said Aravis. 
"And there's another thing I don't understand about that story," said Shasta. "You're not grown up, I don't 
believe you're any older than I am. I don't believe you're as old. How could you be getting married at your 
age?" 
Aravis said nothing, but Bree at once said, "Shasta, don't display your ignorance. They're always married 
at that age in the great Tarkaan families." 
Shasta turned very red (though it was hardly light enough for the others to see this) and felt snubbed. 
Aravis asked Bree for his story. Bree told it, and Shasta thought that he put in a great deal more than he 
needed about the falls and the bad riding. Bree obviously thought it very funny, but Aravis did not laugh. 
When Bree had finished they all went to sleep. 
Next day all four of them, two horses and two humans, continued their journey together. Shasta thought it 
had been much pleasanter when he and Bree were on their own. For now it was Bree and Aravis who did 
nearly all the talking. Bree had lived a long time in Calormen and had always been among Tarkaans and 
Tarkaans' horses, and so of course he knew a great many of the same people and places that Aravis knew. 
She would always be saying things like, "But if you were at the fight of Zulindreh you would have seen 
my cousin Alimash," and Bree would answer, "Oh, yes, Alimash, he was only captain of the chariots, you 
know. I don't quite hold with chariots or the kind of horses who draw chariots. That's not real cavalry. But 
he is a worthy nobleman. He filled my nosebag with sugar after the taking of Teebeth." Or else Bree 
would say, "I was down at the lake of Mezreel that summer," and Aravis would say, "Oh, Mezreel! I had 
a friend there, Lasaraleen Tarkheena. What a delightful place it is. Those gardens, and the Valley of the 
Thousand Perfumes!" Bree was not in the least trying to leave Shasta out of things, though Shasta 
sometimes nearly thought he was. People who know a lot of the same things can hardly help talking about 
them, and if you're there you can hardly help feeling that you're out of it. 
Hwin the mare was rather shy before a great war-horse like Bree and said very little. And Aravis never 
spoke to Shasta at all if she could help it. 
Soon, however, they had more important things to think of. They were getting near Tashbaan. There were 

more, and larger, villages, and more people on the roads. They now did nearly all their travelling by night 
and hid as best they could during the day. And at every halt they argued and argued about what they were 
to do when they reached Tashbaan. Everyone had been putting off this difficulty, but now it could be put 
off no longer. During these discussions Aravis became a little, a very little, less unfriendly to Shasta; one 
usually gets on better with people when one is making plans than when one is talking about nothing in 
particular. 
Bree said the first thing now to do was to fix a place where they would all promise to meet on the far side 
of Tashbaan even if, by any ill luck, they got separated in passing the city. He said the best place would be 
the Tombs of the Ancient Kings on the very edge of the desert. "Things like great stone bee-hives," he 
said, "you can't possibly miss them. And the best of it is that none of the Calormenes will go near them 
because they think the place is haunted by ghouls and are afraid of it." Aravis asked if it wasn't really 
haunted by ghouls. But Bree said he was a free Narnian horse and didn't believe in these Calormene tales. 
And then Shasta said he wasn't a Calormene either and didn't care a straw about these old stories of 
ghouls. This wasn't quite true. But it rather impressed Aravis (though at the moment it annoyed her too) 
and of course she said she didn't mind any number of ghouls either. So it was settled that the Tombs 
should be their assembly place on the other side of Tashbaan, and everyone felt they were getting on very 
well till Hwin humbly pointed out that the real problem was not where they should go when they had got 
through Tashbaan but how they were to get through it. 
"We'll settle that tomorrow, Ma'am," said Bree. "Time for a little sleep now." 
But it wasn't easy to settle. Aravis's first suggestion was that they should swim across the river below the 
city during the night and not go into Tashbaan at all. But Bree had two reasons against this. One was that 
the river-mouth was very wide and it would be far too long a swim for Hwin to do, especially with a rider 
on her back. (He thought it would be too long for himself too, but he said much less about that). The other 
was that it would be full of shipping and of course anyone on the deck of a ship who saw two horses 
swimming past would be almost certain to be inquisitive. 
Shasta thought they should go up the river above Tashbaan and cross it where it was narrower. But Bree 
explained that there were gardens and pleasure houses on both banks of the river for miles and that there 
would be Tarkaans and Tarkheenas living in them and riding about the roads and having water parties on 
the river. In fact it would be the most likely place in the world for meeting someone who would recognize 
Aravis or even himself. 
"We'll have to have a disguise," said Shasta. 
Hwin said it looked to her as if the safest thing was to go right through the city itself from gate to gate 

because one was less likely to be noticed in the crowd. But she approved of the idea of disguise as well. 
She said, "Both the human will have to dress in rags and look like peasants or slaves And all Aravis's 
armour and our saddles and things must be made into bundles and put on our backs, and the children must 
pretend to drive us and people will think we're on pack-horses." 
"My dear Hwin!" said Aravis rather scornfully. "As anyone could mistake Bree for anything but a warhors 
however you disguised him!" 
"I should think not, indeed," said Bree, snorting an letting his ears go ever so little back. 
"I know it's not a very good plan," said Hwin. "But I think it's our only chance. And we haven't been 
groomed for ages and we're not looking quite ourselves (at least, I'm sure I'm not). I do think if we get 
well plastered with mud and go along with our heads down as if we're tired and lazy -and don't lift our 
hooves hardly at all - we might not be noticed. And our tails ought to be cut shorter: not neatly, you know, 
but all ragged." 
"My dear Madam," said Bree. "Have you pictured to yourself how very disagreeable it would be to arrive 
in Narnia in that condition?" 
"Well," said Hwin humbly (she was a very sensible mare), "the main thing is to get there." 
Though nobody much liked it, it was Hwin's plan which had to be adopted in the end. It was a 
troublesome one and involved a certain amount of what Shasta called stealing, and Bree called "raiding". 
One farm lost a few sacks that evening and another lost a coil of rope the next: but some tattered old boy's 
clothes for Aravis to wear had to be fairly bought and paid for in a village. Shasta returned with them in 
triumph just as evening was closing in. The others were waiting for him among the trees at the foot of a 
low range of wooded hills which lay right across their path. Everyone was feeling excited because this 
was the last hill; when they reached the ridge at the top they would be looking down on Tashbaan. "I do 
wish we were safely past it," muttered Shasta to Hwin. "Oh I do, I do," said Hwin fervently. 
That night they wound their way through the woods up to the ridge by a wood-cutter's track. And when 
they came out of the woods at the top they could see thousands of lights in the valley down below them. 
Shasta had had no notion of what a great city would be like and it frightened him. They had their supper 
and the children got some sleep. But the horses woke them very early in the morning. 

The stars were still out and the grass was terribly cold and wet, but daybreak was just beginning, far to 
their right across the sea. Aravis went a few steps away into the wood and came back looking odd in her 
new, ragged clothes and carrying her real ones in a bundle. These, and her armour and shield and scimitar 
and the two saddles and the rest of the horses' fine furnishings were put into the sacks. Bree and Hwin had 
already got themselves as dirty and bedraggled as they could and it remained to shorten their tails. As the 
only tool for doing this was Aravis's scimitar, one of the packs had to be undone again in order to get it 
out. It was a longish job and rather hurt the horses. 
"My word!" said Bree, "if I wasn't a Talking Horse what a lovely kick in the face I could give you! I 
thought you were going to cut it, not pull it out. That's what it feels like." 
But in spite of semi-darkness and cold fingers all was done in the end, the big packs bound on the horses, 
the rope halters (which they were now wearing instead of bridles and reins) in the children's hands, and 
the journey began. 
"Remember," said Bree. "Keep together if we possibly can. If not, meet at the Tombs of the Ancient 
Kings, and whoever gets there first must wait for the others." 
"And remember," said Shasta. "Don't you two horses forget yourselves and start talking, whatever 
happens." 
AT first Shasta could see nothing in the valley below him but a sea of mist with a few domes and 
pinnacles rising from it; but as the light increased and the mist cleared away he saw more and more. A 
broad river divided itself into two streams and on the island between them stood the city of Tashbaan, one 
of the wonders of the world. Round the very edge of the island, so that the water lapped against the stone, 
ran high walls strengthened with so many towers that he soon gave up trying to count them. Inside the 
walls the island rose in a hill and every bit of that hill, up to the Tisroc's palace and the great temple of 
Tash at the top, was completely covered with buildings - terrace above terrace, street above street, zigzag 

roads or huge flights of steps bordered with orange trees and lemon trees, roofgardens, balconies, deep 
archways, pillared colonnades, spires, battlements, minarets, pinnacles. And when at last the sun rose out 
of the sea and the great silver-plated dome of the temple flashed back its light, he was almost dazzled. 
"Get on, Shasta," Bree kept saying. 
The river banks on each side of the valley were such a mass of gardens that they looked at first like 
forest, until you got closer and saw the white walls of innumerable houses peeping out from beneath the 
trees. Soon after that, Shasta noticed a delicious smell of flowers and fruit. About fifteen minutes later 
they were down among them, plodding on a level road with white walls on each side and trees bending 
over the walls. 
"I say," said Shasta in an awed voice. "This is a wonderful place!" 
"I daresay," said Bree. "But I wish we were safely through it and out at the other side. Narnia and the 
North!" 
At that moment a low, throbbing noise began which gradually swelled louder and louder till the whole 
valley seemed to be swaying with it. It was a musical noise, but so strong and solemn as to be a little 
frightening. 
"That's the horns blowing for the city gates to be open," said Bree. "We shall be there in a minute. Now, 
Aravis, do droop your shoulders a bit and step heavier and try to look less like a princess. Try to imagine 
you've been kicked and cuffed and called names all your life." 
"If it comes to that," said Aravis, "what about you drooping your head a bit more and arching your neck a 
bit less and trying to look less like a war-horse?" 
"Hush," said Bree. "Here we are." 
And they were. They had come to the river's edge and the road ahead of them ran along a many-arched 
bridge. The water danced brightly in the early sunlight; away to the right nearer the river's mouth, they 

caught a glimpse ships' masts. Several other travellers were before them on the bridge, mostly peasants 
driving laden donkeys and mules or carrying baskets on their heads. The children and horses joined the 
crowd. 
"Is anything wrong?" whispered Shasta to Aravis, who had an odd look on her face. 
"Oh it's all very well for you," whispered Aravis rather savagely. "What would you care about Tashbaan? 
But I ought to be riding in on a litter with soldiers before me and slaves behind, and perhaps going to a 
feast in the Tisroc's palace (may he live for ever) - not sneaking in like this. It's different for you." 
Shasta thought all this very silly. 
At the far end of the bridge the walls of the city towered high above them and the brazen gates stood 
open in the gateway which was really wide but looked narrow because it was so very high. Half a dozen 
soldiers, leaning on their spears, stood on each side. Aravis couldn't help thinking, "They'd all jump to 
attention and salute me if they knew whose daughter I am." But the others were only thinking of how 
they'd get through and hoping the soldiers would not ask any questions. Fortunately they did not. But one 
of them picked a carrot out of a peasant's basket and threw it at Shasta with a rough laugh, saying: 
"Hey! Horse-boy! You'll catch it if your master finds you've been using his saddle-horse for pack work." 
This frightened him badly for of course it showed that no one who knew anything about horses would 
mistake Bree for anything but a charger. 
"It's my master's orders, so there!" said Shasta. But it would have been better if he had held his tongue for 
the soldier gave him a box on the side of his face that nearly knocked him down and said, "Take that, you 
young filth, to teach you how to talk to freemen." But they all slunk into the city without being stopped. 
Shasta cried only a very little; he was used to hard knocks. 
Inside the gates Tashbaan did not at first seem so splendid as it had looked from a distance. The first 
street was narrow and there were hardly any windows in the walls on each side. It was much more 
crowded than Shasta had expected: crowded partly by the peasants (on their way to market) who had 
come in with them, but also with watersellers, sweetmeat sellers, porters, soldiers, beggars, ragged 
children, hens, stray dogs, and bare-footed slaves. What you would chiefly have noticed if you had been 

there was the smells, which came from unwashed people, unwashed dogs, scent, garlic, onions, and the 
piles of refuse which lay everywhere. 
Shasta was pretending to lead but it was really Bree, who knew the way and kept guiding him by little 
nudges with his nose. They soon turned to the left and began going up a steep hill. It was much fresher 
and pleasanter, for the road was bordered by trees and there were houses only on the right side; on the 
other they looked out over the roofs of houses in the lower town and could see some way up the river. 
Then they went round a hairpin bend to their right and continued rising. They were zigzagging up to the 
centre of Tashbaan. Soon they came to finer streets. Great statues of the gods and heroes of Calormen - 
who are mostly impressive rather than agreeable to look at- rose on shining pedestals. Palm trees and 
pillared arcades cast shadows over the burning pavements. And through the arched gateways of many a 
palace Shasta caught sight of green branches, cool fountains, and smooth lawns. It must be nice inside, he 
thought. 
At every turn Shasta hoped they were getting out of the crowd, but they never did. This made their 
progress very slow, and every now and then they had to stop altogether. This usually happened because a 
loud voice shouted out "Way, way, way, for the Tarkaan", or "for the Tarkheena", or "for the fifteenth 
Vizier", "or for the Ambassador", and everyone in the crowd would crush back against the walls; and 
above their heads Shasta would sometimes see the great lord or lady for whom all the fuss was being 
made, lolling upon a litter which four or even six gigantic slaves carried on their bare shoulders. For in 
Tashbaan there is only one traffic regulation, which is that everyone who is less important has to get out 
of the way for everyone who is more important; unless you want a cut from a whip or punch from the butt 
end of a spear. 
It was in a splendid street very near the top of the city (the Tisroc's palace was the only thing above it) 
that the most disastrous of these stoppages occurred. 
"Way! Way! Way!" came the voice. "Way for the White Barbarian King, the guest of the Tisroc (may he 
live for ever)! Way for the Narnian lords." 
Shasta tried to get out of the way and to make Bree go back. But no horse, not even a Talking Horse from 
Narnia, backs easily. And a woman with a very edgy basket in her hands, who was just behind Shasta, 
pushed the basket hard against his shoulders, and said, "Now then! Who are you shoving!" And then 
someone else jostled him from the side and in the confusion of the moment he lost hold of Bree. And then 
the whole crowd behind him became so stiffened and packed tight that he couldn't move at all. So he 
found himself, unintentionally, in the first row and had a fine sight of the party that was coming down the 
street. 

It was quite unlike any other party they had seen that day. The crier who went before it shouting "Way, 
way!" was the only Calormene in it. And there was no litter; everyone was on foot. There were about half 
a dozen men and Shasta had never seen anyone like them before. For one thing, they were all as fairskinned 
as himself, and most of them had fair hair. And they were not dressed like men of Calormen. 
Most of them had legs bare to the kneee. Their tunics were of fine, bright, hardy colours - woodland 
green, or gay yellow, or fresh blue. Instead of turbans they wore steel or silver caps, some of them set 
with jewels, and one with little wings on each side of it. A few were bare-headed. The swords at their 
sides were long and straight, not curved like Calormene scimitars. And instead of being grave and 
mysterious like most Calormenes, they walked with a swing and let their arms and shoulders free, and 
chatted and laughed. One was whistling. You could see that they were ready to be friends with anyone 
who was friendly and didn't give a fig for anyone who wasn't. Shasta thought he had never seen anything 
so lovely in his life. 
But there was not time to enjoy it for at once a really dreadful thing happened. The leader of the fairheaded 
men suddenly pointed at Shasta, cried out, "There he is! There's our runaway!" and seized him by 
the shoulder. Next moment he gave Shasta a smack - not a cruel one to make you cry but a sharp one to 
let you know you are in disgrace and added, shaking: 
"Shame on you, my lord! Fie for shame! Queen Susan's eyes are red with weeping because of you. What! 
Truant for a whole night! Where have you been?" 
Shasta would have darted under Bree's body and tried to make himself scarce in the crowd if he had had 
the least chance; but the fair-haired men were all round him by now and he was held firm. 
Of course his first impulse was to say that he was only poor Arsheesh the fisherman's son and that the 
foreign lord must have mistaken him for someone else. But then, the very last thing he wanted to do in 
that crowded place was to start explaining who he was and what he was doing. If he started on that, he 
would soon be asked where he had got his horse from, and who Aravis was - and then, goodbye to any 
chance of getting through Tashbaan. His next impulse was to look at Bree for help. But Bree had no 
intention of letting all the crowd know that he could talk, and stood looking just as stupid as a horse can. 
As for Aravis, Shasta did not even dare to look at her for fear of drawing attention. And there was no time 
to think, for the leader of the Narnians said at once: 
"Take one of his little lordship's hands, Peridan, of your courtesy, and I'll take the other. And now, on. 
Our royal sister's mind will be greatly eased when she sees our young scapegrace safe in our lodging." 
And so, before they were half-way through Tashbaan, all their plans were ruined, and without even a 
chance to say good-bye to the others Shasta found himself being marched off among strangers and quite 

unable to guess what might be going to happen next. The Narnian King - for Shasta began to see by the 
way the rest spoke to him that he must be a king - kept on asking him questions; where he had been, how 
he had got out, what he had done with his clothes, and didn't he know that he had been very naughty. 
Only the king called it "naught" instead of naughty. 
And Shasta said nothing in answer, because he couldn't think of anything to say that would not be 
dangerous. 
"What! All mum?" asked the king. "I must plainly tell you, prince, that this hangdog silence becomes one 
of your blood even less than the scape itself. To run away might pass for a boy's frolic with some spirit in 
it. But the king's son of Archenland should avouch his deed; not hang his head like a Calormene slave." 
This was very unpleasant, for Shasta felt all the time that this young king was the very nicest kind of 
grown-up and would have liked to make a good impression on him. 
The strangers led him-held tightly by both hands-along a narrow street and down a flight of shallow stairs 
and then up another to a wide doorway in a white wall with two tall, dark cypress trees, one on each side 
of it. Once through the arch, Shasta found himself in a courtyard which was also a garden. A marble basin 
of clear water in the centre was kept continually rippling by the fountain that fell into it. Orange trees 
grew round it out of smooth grass, and the four white walls which surrounded the lawn were covered with 
climbing roses. The noise and dust and crowding of the streets seemed suddenly fad away. He was led 
rapidly across the garden and then into a dark doorway. The crier remained outside. After that they took 
him along a corridor, where the stone floor felt beautifully cool to his hot feet, and up some stairs. A 
moment later he found himself blinking in the light of a big, airy room with wide open windows, all 
looking North so that no sun came in. There was a carpet on the floor more wonderfully coloured than 
anything he had ever seen and his feet sank down into it as if he were treading in thick moss. All round 
the walls there were low sofas with rich cushions on them, and the room seemed to be full of people; very 
queer people some of them, thought Shasta. But he had no time to think of that before the most beautiful 
lady he had ever seen rose from her place and threw her arms round him and kissed him, saying: 
"Oh Corin, Corin, how could you? And thou and I such close friends ever since thy mother died. And 
what should I have said to thy royal father if I came home without thee? Would have been a cause almost 
of war between Archenland and Narnia which are friends time out of mind. It was naught, playmate, very 
naught of thee to use us so." 
"Apparently," thought Shasta to himself, "I'm being mistaken for a prince of Archenland, wherever that 
is. And these must be the Narnians. I wonder where the real Corin is?" But these thoughts did not help 
him say anything out loud. 

"Where hast been, Corin?" said the lady, her hands still on Shasta's shoulders. 
"I- I don't know," stammered Shasta. 
"There it is, Susan," said the King. "I could get no tale out of him, true or false." 
"Your Majesties! Queen Susan! King Edmund!" said a voice: and when Shasta turned to look at the 
speaker he nearly jumped out of his skin with surprise. For this was one of these queer people whom he 
had noticed out of the corner of his eye when he first came into the room. He was about the same height 
as Shasta himself. From the waist upwards he was like a man, but his legs were hairy like a goat's, and 
shaped like a goat's and he had goat's hooves and a tail. His skin was rather red and he had curly hair and 
a short pointed beard and two little horns. He was in fact a Faun, which is a creature Shasta had never 
seen a picture of or even heard of. And if you've read a book called The Lion, the Witch and the 
Wardrobe you may like to know that this was the very same Faun, Tumnus by name, whom Queen 
Susan's sister Lucy had met on the very first day when she found her way into Narnia. But he was a good 
deal older now for by this time Peter and Susan and Edmund and Lucy had been Kings and Queens of 
Narnia for several years. 
"Your Majesties," he was saying, "His little Highness has had a touch of the sun. Look at him! He is 
dazed. He does not know where he is." 
Then of course everyone stopped scolding Shasta and asking him questions and he was made much of 
and laid on a sofa and cushions were put under his head and he was given iced sherbet in a golden cup to 
drink and told to keep very quiet. 
Nothing like this had ever happened to Shasta in his life before. He had never even imagined lying on 
anything so comfortable as that sofa or drinking anything so delicious as that sherbet. He was still 
wondering what had happened to the others and how on earth he was going to escape and meet them at 
the Tombs, and what would happen when the real Corin turned up again. But none of these worries 
seemed so pressing now that he was comfortable. And perhaps, later on, there would be nice things to eat! 
Meanwhile the people in that cool airy room were very interesting. Besides the Faun there were two 
Dwarfs (a kind of creature he had never seen before) and a very large Raven. 

The rest were all humans; grown-ups, but young, and all of them, both men and women, had nicer faces 
and voices than most Calormenes. And soon Shasta found himself taking an interest in the conversation. 
"Now, Madam," the King was saying to Queen Susan (the lady who had kissed Shasta). "What think you? 
We have been in this city fully three weeks. Have you yet settled in your mind whether you will marry 
this dark-faced lover of yours, this Prince Rabadash, or no?" 
The lady shook her head. "No, brother," she said, "not for all the jewels in Tashbaan." ("Hullo!" thought 
Shasta. "Although they're king and queen, they're brother and sister, not married to one another.") 
"Truly, sister," said the King, "I should have loved you the less if you had taken him. And I tell you that 
at the first coming of the Tisroc's ambassadors into Narnia to treat of this marriage, and later when the 
Prince was our guest at Cair Paravel, it was a wonder to me that ever you could find it in your heart to 
show him so much favour." 
"That was my folly, Edmund," said Queen Susan, "of which I cry you mercy. Yet when he was with us in 
Narnia, truly this Prince bore himself in another fashion than he does now in Tashbaan. For I take you all 
to witness what marvellous feats he did in that great tournament and hastilude which our brother the High 
King made for him, and how meekly and courteously he consorted with us the space of seven days. But 
here, in his own city, he has shown another face." 
"Ah!" croaked the Raven. "It is an old saying: see the bear in his own den before you judge of his 
conditions." 
"That's very true, Sallowpad," said one of the Dwarfs. "And another is, Come, live with me and you'll 
know me." 
"Yes," said the King. "We have now seen him for what he is: that is, a most proud, bloody, luxurious, 
cruel, and selfpleasing tryant." 
"Then in the name of Aslan," said Susan, "let us leave Tashbaan this very day." 

"There's the rub, sister," said Edmund. "For now I must open to you all that has been growing in my mind 
these last two days and more. Peridan, of your courtesy look to the door and see that there is no spy upon 
us. All well? So. For now we must be secret." 
Everyone had begun to look very serious. Queen Susan jumped up and ran to her brother. "Oh, Edmund," 
she cried. "What is it? There is something dreadful in your face." 
"MY dear sister and very good Lady," said King Edmund, "you must now show your courage. For I tell 
you plainly we are in no small danger." 
"What is it, Edmund asked the Queen. 
"It is this," said Edmund. "I do not think we shall find it easy to leave Tashbaan. While the Prince had 
hope that you would take him, we were honoured guests. But by the Lion's Mane, I think that as soon as 
he has your flat denial we shall be no better than prisoners." 
One of the Dwarfs gave a low whistle. 
"I warned your Majesties, I warned you," said Sallowpad the Raven. "Easily in but not easily out, as the 
lobster said in the lobster pot!" 
"I have been with the Prince this morning," continued Edmund. "He is little used (more's the pity) to 
having his will crossed. And he is very chafed at your long delays and doubtful answers. This morning he 
pressed very hard to know your mind. I put it aside-meaning at the same time to diminish his hopes - with 
some light common jests about women's fancies, and hinted that his suit was likely to be cold. He grew 

angry and dangerous. There was a sort of threatening, though still veiled under a show of courtesy, in 
every word he spoke." 
"Yes," said Tumnus. "And when I supped with the Grand Vizier last night, it was the same. He asked me 
how I like Tashbaan. And I (for I could not tell him I hated every stone of it and I would not lie) told him 
that now, when high summer was coming on, my heart turned to the cool woods and dewy slopes of 
Narnia. He gave a smile that meant no good and said, `There is nothing to hinder you from dancing there 
again, little goatfoot; always provided you leave us in exchange a bride for our prince.'" 
"Do you mean he would make me his wife by force?" exclaimed Susan. 
"That's my fear, Susan," said Edmund: "Wife: or slave which is worse." 
"But how can he? Does the Tisroc think our brother the High King would suffer such an outrage?" 
"Sire," said Peridan to the King. "They would not be so mad. Do they think there are no swords and 
spears in Narnia?" 
"Alas," said Edmund. "My guess is that the Tisroc has very small fear of Narnia. We are a little land. And 
little lands on the borders of a great empire were always hateful to the lords of the great empire. He longs 
to blot them out, gobble them up. When first he suffered the Prince to come to Cair Paravel as your lover, 
sister, it may be that he was only seeking an occasion against us. Most likely he hopes to make one 
mouthful of Narnia and Archenland both." 
"Let him try," said the second Dwarf. "At sea we are as big as he is. And if he assaults us by land, he has 
the desert to cross." 
"True, friend," said Edmund. "But is the desert a sure defence? What does Sallowpad say?" 
"I know that desert well," said the Raven. "For I have flown above it far and wide in my younger days," 
(you may be sure that Shasta pricked up his ears at this point). "And this is certain; that if the Tisroc goes 
by the great oasis he can never lead a great army across it into Archenland. For though they could reach 

the oasis by the end of their first day's march, yet the springs there would be too little for the thirst of all 
those soldiers and their beasts. But there is another way." 
Shasta listened more attentively still. 
"He that would find that way," said the Raven, "must start from the Tombs of the Ancient Kings and ride 
northwest so that the double peak of Mount Pire is always straight ahead of him. And so, in a day's riding 
or a little more, he shall come to the head of a stony valley, which is so narrow that a man might be within 
a furlong of it a thousand times and never know that it was there. And looking down this valley he will 
see neither grass nor water nor anything else good. But if he rides on down it he will come to a river and 
can ride by the water all the way into Archenland." 
"And do the Calormenes know of this Western way?" asked the Queen. 
"Friends, friends," said Edmund, "what is the use of all this discourse? We are not asking whether Narnia 
or Calormen would win if war arose between them. We are asking how to save the honour of the Queen 
and our own lives out of this devilish city. For though my brother, Peter the High King, defeated the 
Tisroc a dozen times over, yet long before that day our throats would be cut and the Queen's grace would 
be the wife, or more likely, the slave, of this prince." 
"We have our weapons, King," said the first Dwarf. "And this is a reasonably defensible house." 
"As to that," said the King, "I do not doubt that every one of us would sell our lives dearly in the gate and 
they would not come at the Queen but over our dead bodies. Yet we should be merely rats fighting in a 
trap when all's said." 
"Very true," croaked the Raven. "These last stands in a house make good stories, but nothing ever came 
of them. After their first few repulses the enemy always set the house on fire." 
"I am the cause of all this," said Susan, bursting into tears. "Oh, if only I had never left Cair Paravel. Our 
last happy day was before those ambassadors came from Calormen. The Moles were planting an orchard 
for us . . . oh . . . oh." 

And she buried her face in her hands and sobbed. 
"Courage, Su, courage," said Edmund. "Remember-but what is the matter with you, Master Tumnus?" 
For the Faun was holding both his horns with his hands as if he were trying to keep his head on by them 
and writhing to and fro as if he had a pain in his inside. 
"Don't speak to me, don't speak to me," said Tumnus. "I'm thinking. I'm thinking so that I can hardly 
breathe. Wait, wait, do wait." 
There was a moment's puzzled silence and then the Faun looked up, drew a long breath, mopped its 
forehead and said: 
"The only difficulty is how to get down to our ship-with some stores, too-without being seen and 
stopped." 
"Yes," said a Dwarf dryly. "Just as the beggar's only difficulty about riding is that he has no horse." 
"Wait, wait," said Mr Tumnus impatiently. "All we need is some pretext for going down to our ship 
today and taking stuff on board." 
"Yes," said King Edmund doubtfully. 
"Well, then," said the Faun, "how would it be if your majesties bade the Prince to a great banquet to be 
held on board our own galleon, the Spendour Hyaline, tomorrow night? And let the message be worded as 
graciously as the Queen can contrive without pledging her honour: so as to give the Prince a hope that she 
is weakening." 
"This is very good counsel, Sire," croaked the Raven. 

"And then," continued Tumnus excitedly, "everyone will expect us to be going down to the ship all day, 
making preparations for our guests. And let some of us go to the bazaars and spend every minim we have 
at the fruiterers and the sweetmeat sellers and the wine merchants, just as we would if we were really 
giving a feast. And let us order magicians and jugglers and dancing girls and flute players, all to be on 
board tomorrow night." 
"I see, I see," said King Edmund, rubbing his hands. 
"And then," said Tumnus, "we'll all be on board tonight. And as soon as it is quite dark-" 
"Up sails and out oars-!" said the King. 
"And so to sea," cried Tumnus, leaping up and beginning to dance. 
"And our nose Northward," said the first Dwarf. 
"Running for home! Hurrah for Narnia and the North!" said the other. 
"And the Prince waking next morning and finding his birds flown!" said Peridan, clapping his hands. 
"Oh Master Tumnus, dear Master Tumnus," said the Queen, catching his hands and swinging with him as 
he danced. "You have saved us all." 
"The Prince will chase us," said another lord, whose name Shasta had not heard. 
"That's the least of my fears," said Edmund. "I have seen all the shipping in the river and there's no tall 
ship of war nor swift galley there. I wish he may chase us! For the Splendour Hyaline could sink anything 
he has to send after her - if we were overtaken at all." 

"Sire," said the Raven. "You shall hear no better plot than the Faun's though we sat in council for seven 
days. And now, as we birds say, nests before eggs. Which is as much as to say, let us all take our food and 
then at once be about our business." 
Everyone arose at this and the doors were opened and the lords and the creatures stood aside for the King 
and Queen to go out first. Shasta wondered what he ought to do, but Mr Tumnus said, "Lie there, your 
Highness, and I will bring you up a little feast to yourself in a few moments. There is no need for you to 
move until we are all ready to embark." 
Shasta laid his head down again on the pillows and soon he was alone in the room. 
"This is perfectly dreadful," thought Shasta. It never came into his head to tell these Narnians the whole 
truth and ask for their help. Having been brought up by a hard, closefisted man like Arsheesh, he had a 
fixed habit of never telling grown-ups anything if he could help it: he thought they would always spoil or 
stop whatever you were trying to do. And he thought that even if the Narnian King might be friendly to 
the two horses, because they were Talking Beasts of Narnia, he would hate Aravis, because she was a 
Calormene, and either sell her for a slave or send her back to her father. As for himself, "I simply dn't tell 
them I'm not Prince Corin now," thought Shasta. "I've heard all their plans. If they knew I wasn't one of 
themselves, they'd never let me out of this house alive. They'd be afraid I'd betray them to the Tisroc. 
They'd kill me. And if the real Corin turns up, it'll all come out, and they will!" He had, you see, no idea 
of how noble and free-born people behave. 
"What am I to do? What am I to do?" he kept saying to himself. "What-hullo, here comes that goaty little 
creature again." 
The Faun trotted in, half dancing, with a tray in its hands which was nearly as large as itself. This he set 
on an inlaid table beside Shasta's sofa, and sat down himself on the carpeted floor with his goaty legs 
crossed. 
"Now, princeling," he said. "Make a good dinner. It will be your last meal in Tashbaan." 
It was a fine meal after the Calormene fashion. I don't know whether you would have liked it or not, but 
Shasta did. There were lobsters, and salad, and snipe stuffed with almonds and truffles, and a complicated 
dish made of chickenlivers and rice and raisins and nuts, and there were cool melons and gooseberry fools 
and mulberry fools, and every kind of nice thing that can be made with ice. There was also a little flagon 

of the sort of wine that is called "white" though it is really yellow. 
While Shasta was eating, the good little Faun, who thought he was still dazed with sunstroke, kept talking 
to him about the fine times he would have when they all got home; about his good old father King Lune 
of Archenland and the little castle where he lived on the southern slopes of the pass. "And don't forget," 
said Mr Tumnus, "that you are promised your first suit of armour and your first war horse on your next 
birthday. And then your Highness will begin to learn how to tilt and joust. And in a few years, if all goes 
well, King Peter has promised your royal father that he himself will make you Knight at Cair Paravel. 
And in the meantime there will be plenty of comings and goings between Narnia and Archenland across 
the neck of the mountains. And of course you remember you have promised to come for a whole week to 
stay with me for the Summer Festival, and there'll be bonfires and all-night dances of Fauns and Dryads in 
the heart of the woods and, who knows?-we might see Aslan himself!" 
When the meal was over the Faun told Shasta to stay quietly where he was. "And it wouldn't do you any 
harm to have a little sleep," he added. "I'll call you in plenty of time to get on board. And then, Home. 
Narnia and the North!" 
Shasta had so enjoyed his dinner and all the things Tumnus had been telling him that when he was left 
alone his thoughts took a different turn. He only hoped now that the real Prince Corin would not turn up 
until it was too late and that he would be taken away to Narnia by ship. I am afraid he did not think at all 
of what might happen to the real Corin when he was left behind in Tashbaan. He was a little worried 
about Aravis and Bree waiting for him at the Tombs. But then he said to himself, "Well, how can I help 
it?" and, "Anyway, that Aravis thinks she's too good to go about with me, so she can jolly well go alone," 
and at the same time he couldn't help feeling that it would be much nicer going to Narnia by sea than 
toiling across the desert. 
When he had thought all this he did what I expect you would have done if you had been up very early 
and had a long walk and a great deal of excitement and then a very good meal, and were lying on a sofa in 
a cool room with no noise in it except when a bee came buzzing in through the wide open windows. He 
fell asleep. 
What woke him was a loud crash. He jumped up off the sofa, staring. He saw at once from the mere look 
of the room - the lights and shadows all looked different - that he must have slept for several hours. He 
saw also what had made the crash: a costly porcelain vase which had been standing on the window-sill lay 
on -the floor broken into about thirty pieces. But he hardly noticed all these things. What he did notice 
was two hands gripping the window-sill from outside. They gripped harder and harder (getting white at 
the knuckles) and then up came a head and a pair of shoulders. A moment later there was a boy of 
Shasta's own age sitting astride the sill with one leg hanging down inside the room. 

Shasta had never seen his own face in a looking-glass. Even if he had, he might not have realized that the 
other boy was (at ordinary times) almost exactly like himself. At the moment this boy was not particularly 
like anyone for he had the finest black eye you ever saw, and a tooth missing, and his clothes (which must 
have been splendid ones when he put them on) were torn and dirty, and there was both blood and mud on 
his face. 
"Who are you?" said the boy in a whisper. 
"Are you Prince Corin?" said Shasta. 
"Yes, of course," said the other. "But who are you?" 
"I'm nobody, nobody in particular, I mean," said Shasta. "King Edmund caught me in the street and 
mistook me for you. I suppose we must look like one another. Can I get out the way you've got in?" 
"Yes, if you're any good at climbing," said Corin. "But why are you in such a hurry? I say: we ought to 
be able to get some fun out of this being mistaken for one another." 
"No, no," said Shasta. "We must change places at once. It'll be simply frightful if Mr Tumnus comes back 
and finds us both here. I've had to pretend to be you. And you're starting tonight - secretly. And where 
were you all this time?" 
"A boy in the street made a beastly joke about Queen Susan," said Prince Corin, "so I knocked him down. 
He ran howling into a house and his big brother came out. So I knocked the big brother down. Then they 
all followed me until we ran into three old men with spears who are called the Watch. So I fought the 
Watch and they knocked me down. It was getting dark by now. Then the Watch took me along to lock me 
up somewhere. So I asked them if they'd like a stoup of wine and they said they didn't mind if they did. 
Then I took them to a wine shop and got them some and they all sat down and drank till they feel asleep. I 
thought it was time for me to be off so I came out quietly and then I found the first boy - the one who had 
started all the trouble - still hanging about. So I knocked him down again. After that I climbed up a pipe 
on to the roof of a house and lay quiet till it began to get light this morning. Ever since that I've been 
finding my way back. I say, is there anything to drink?" 

"No, I drank it," said Shasta. "And now, show me how you got in. There's not a minute to lose. You'd 
better lie down on the sofa and pretend-but I forgot. It'll be no good with all those bruises and black eye. 
You'll just have to tell them the truth, once I'm safely away." 
"What else did you think I'd be telling them?" asked the Prince with a rather angry look. "And who are 
you?" 
"There's no time," said Shasta in a frantic whisper. "I'm a Narnian, I believe; something Northern 
anyway. But I've been brought up all my life in Calormen. And I'm escaping: across the desert; with a 
talking Horse called Bree. And now, quick! How do I get away?" 
"Look," said Corin. "Drop from this window on to the roof of the verandah. But you must do it lightly, on 
your toes, or someone will hear you. Then along to your left and you can get up to the top of that wall if 
you're any good at all as a climber. Then along the wall to the corner. Drop onto the rubbish heap you will 
find outside, and there you are." 
"Thanks," said Shasta, who was already sitting on the sill. The two boys were looking into each other's 
faces and suddenly found that they were friends. 
"Good-bye," said Corin. "And good luck. I do hope you get safe away." 
"Good-bye," said Shasta. "I say, you have been having some adventures." 
"Nothing to yours," said the Prince. "Now drop; lightlyI say," he added as Shasta dropped. "I hope we 
meet in Archenland. Go to my father King Lune and tell him you're a friend of mine. Look out! I hear 
someone coming." 

SHASTA ran lightly along the roof on tiptoes. It felt hot to his bare feet. He was only a few seconds 
scrambling up the wall at the far end and when he got to the corner he found himself looking down into a 
narrow, smelly street, and there was a rubbish heap against the outside of the wall just as Corin had told 
him. Before jumping down he took a rapid glance round him to get his bearings. Apparently he had now 
come over the crown of the island-hill on which Tashbaan is built. Everything sloped away before him, 
flat roofs below flat roofs, down to the towers and battlements of the city's Northern wall. Beyond that 
was the river and beyond the river a short slope covered with gardens. But beyond that again there was 
something he had never seen the like of - a great yellowish-grey thing, flat as a calm sea, and stretching 
for miles. On the far side of it were huge blue things, lumpy but with jagged edges, and some of them 
with white tops. "The desert! the mountains!" thought Shasta. 
He jumped down on to the rubbish and began trotting along downhill as fast as he could in the narrow 
lane, which soon brought him into a wider street where there were more people. No one bothered to look 
at a little ragged boy running along on bare feet. Still, he was anxious and uneasy till he turned a corner 
and there saw the city gate in front of him. Here he was pressed and jostled a bit, for a good many other 
people were also going out; and on the bridge beyond the gate the crowd became quite a slow procession, 
more like a queue than a crowd. Out there, with clear running water on each side, it was deliciously fresh 
after the smell and heat and noise of Tashbaan. 
When once Shasta had reached the far end of the bridge he found the crowd melting away; everyone 
seemed to be going either to the left or right along the river bank. He went straight ahead up a road that 
did not appear to be much used, between gardens. In a few paces he was alone, and a few more brought 
him to the top of the slope. There he stood and stared. It was like coming to the end of the world for all 
the grass stopped quite suddenly a few feet before him and the sand began: endless level sand like on a 
sea shore but a bit rougher because it was never wet. The mountains, which now looked further off than 
before, loomed ahead. Greatly to his relief he saw, about five minutes' walk away on his left, what must 
certainly be the Tombs, just as Bree had described them; great masses of mouldering stone shaped like 
gigantic bee-hive, but a little narrower. They looked very black and grim, for the sun was now setting 
right behind them. 
He turned his face West and trotted towards the Tombs. He could not help looking out very hard for any 
sign of his friends, though the setting sun shone in his face so that he could see hardly anything. "And 
anyway," he thought, "of course they'll be round on the far side of the farthest Tomb, not this side where 
anyone might see them from the city." 
There were about twelve Tombs, each with a low arched doorway that opened into absolute blackness. 
They were dotted about in no kind of order, so that it took a long time, going round this one and going 
round that one, before you could be sure that you had looked round every side of every tomb. This was 

what Shasta had to do. There was nobody there. 
It was very quiet here out on the edge of the desert; and now the sun had really set. 
Suddenly from somewhere behind him there came a terrible sound. Shasta's heart gave a great jump and 
he had to bite his tongue to keep himself from screaming. Next moment he realized what it was: the horns 
of Tashbaan blowing for the closing of the gates. "Don't be a silly little coward," said Shasta to himself. 
"Why, it's only the same noise you heard this morning." But there is a great difference between a noise 
heard letting you in with your friends in the morning, and a noise heard alone at nightfall, shutting you 
out. And now that the gates were shut he knew there was no chance of the others joining him that evening. 
"Either they're shut up in Tashbaan for the night," thought Shasta, "or else they've gone on without me. 
It's just the sort of thing that Aravis would do. But Bree wouldn't. Oh, he wouldn't. - now, would he?" 
In this idea about Aravis Shasta was once more quite wrong. She was proud and could be hard enough 
but she was as true as steel and would never have deserted a companion, whether she liked him or not. 
Now that Shasta knew he would have to spend the night alone (it was getting darker every minute) he 
began to like the look of the place less and less. There was something very uncomfortable about those 
great, silent shapes of stone. He had been trying his hardest for a long time not to think of ghouls: but he 
couldn't keep it up any longer. 
"Ow! Ow! Help!" he shouted suddenly, for at that very moment he felt something touch his leg. I don't 
think anyone can be blamed for shouting if something comes up from behind and touches him; not in such 
a place and at such a time, when he is frightened already. Shasta at any rate was too frightened to run. 
Anything would be better than being chased round and round the burial places of the Ancient Kings with 
something he dared not look at behind him. Instead, he did what was really the most sensible thing he 
could do. He looked round; and his heart almost burst with relief. What had touched him was only a cat. 
The light was too bad now for Shasta to see much of the cat except that it was big and very solemn. It 
looked as if it might have lived for long, long years among the Tombs, alone. Its eyes made you think it 
knew secrets it would not tell. 
"Puss, puss," said Shasta. "I suppose you're not a talking cat." 

The cat stared at him harder than ever. Then it started walking away, and of course Shasta followed it. It 
led him right through the tombs and out on the desert side of them. There it sat down bolt upright with its 
tail curled round its feet and its face set towards the desert and towards Narnia and the North, as still as if 
it were watching for some enemy. Shasta lay down beside it with his back against the cat and his face 
towards the Tombs, because if one is nervous there's nothing like having your face towards the danger 
and having something warm and solid at your back. The sand wouldn't have seemed very comfortable to 
you, but Shasta had been sleeping on the ground for weeks and hardly noticed it. Very soon he fell asleep, 
though even in his dreams he went on wondering what had happened to Bree and Aravis and Hwin. 
He was wakened suddenly by a noise he had never heard before. "Perhaps it was only a nightmare," said 
Shasta to himself. At the same moment he noticed that the cat had gone from his back, and he wished it 
hadn't. But he lay quite still without even opening his eyes because he felt sure he would be more 
frightened if he sat up and looked round at the Tombs and the loneliness: just as you or I might lie still 
with the clothes over our heads. But then the noise came again - a harsh, piercing cry from behind him out 
of the desert. Then of course he had to open his eyes and sit up. 
The moon was shining brightly. The Tombs - far bigger and nearer than he had thought they would be - 
looked grey in the moonlight. In fact, they looked horribly like huge people, draped in grey robes that 
covered their heads and faces. They were not at all nice things to have near you when spending a night 
alone in a strange place. But the noise had come from the opposite side, from the desert. Shasta had to 
turn his back on the Tombs (he didn't like that much) and stare out across the level sand. The wild cry 
rang out again. 
"I hope it's not more lions," thought Shasta. It was in fact not very like the lion's roars he had heard on the 
night when they met Hwin and Aravis, and was really the cry of a jackal. But of course Shasta did not 
know this. Even if he had known, he would not have wanted very much to meet a jackal. 
The cries rang out again and again. "There's more than one of them, whatever they are," thought Shasta. 
"And they're coming nearer." 
I suppose that if he had been an entirely sensible boy he would have gone back through the Tombs nearer 
to the river where there were houses, and wild beasts would be less likely to come. But then there were (or 
he thought there were) the ghouls. To go back through the Tombs would mean going past those dark 
openings in the Tombs; and what might come out of them? It may have been silly, but Shasta felt he 
would rather risk the wild beasts. Then, as the cries came nearer and nearer, he began to change his mind. 
He was just going to run for it when suddenly, between him and the desert, a huge animal bounded into 
view. As the moon was behind it, it looked quite black, and Shasta did not know what it was, except that 

it had a very big, shaggy head and went on four legs. It did not seem to have noticed Shasta, for it 
suddenly stopped, turned its head towards the desert and let out a roar which re-echoed through the 
Tombs and seemed to shake the sand under Shasta's feet. The cries of the other creatures suddenly stoppd 
and he thought he could hear feet scampering away. Then the great beast turned to examine Shasta. 
"It's a lion, I know it's a lion," thought Shasta. "I'm done. I wonder will it hurt much. I wish it was over. I 
wonder does anything happen to people after they're dead. O-o-oh! Here it comes!" And he shut his eyes 
and his teeth tight. 
But instead of teeth and claws he only felt something warm lying down at his feet. And when he opened 
his eyes he said, "Why, it's not nearly as big as I thought! It's only half the size. No, it isn't even quarter 
the size. I do declare it's only the cat!! I must have dreamed all that about its being as big as a horse." 
And whether he really had been dreaming or not, what was now lying at his feet, and staring him out of 
countenance with its big, green, unwinking eyes, was the cat; though certainly one of the largest cats he 
had ever seen. 
"Oh, Puss," gasped Shasta. "I am so glad to see you again. I've been having such horrible dreams." And 
he at once lay down again, back to back with the cat as they had been at the beginning of the night. The 
warmth from it spread all over him. 
"I'll never do anything nasty to a cat again as long as I live," said Shasta, half to the cat and half to 
himself. "I did once, you know. I threw stones at a half-starved mangy old stray. Hey! Stop that." For the 
cat had turned round and given him a scratch. "None of that," said Shasta. "It isn't as if you could 
understand what I'm saying." Then he dozed off. 
Next morning when he woke, the cat was gone, the sun was already up, and the sand hot. Shasta, very 
thirsty, sat up and rubbed his eyes. The desert was blindingly white and, though there was a murmur of 
noises from the city behind him, where he sat everything was perfectly still. When he looked a little left 
and west, so that the sun was not in his eyes, he could see the mountains on the far side of the desert, so 
sharp and clear that they looked only a stone's throw away. He particularly noticed one blue height that 
divided into two peaks at the top and decided that it must be Mount Pire. "That's our direction, judging by 
what the Raven said," he thought, "so I'll just make sure of it, so as not to waste any time when the others 
turn up." So he made a good, deep straight furrow with his foot pointing exactly to Mount Pire. 
The next job, clearly, was to get something to eat and drink. Shasta trotted back through the Tombs - they 

looked quite ordinary now and he wondered how he could ever have been afraid of them - and down into 
the cultivated land by the river's side. There were a few people about but not very many, for the city gates 
had been open several hours and the early morning crowds had already gone in. So he had no diffculty in 
doing a little "raiding" (as Bree called it). It involved a climb over a garden wall and the results were three 
oranges, a melon, a fig or two, and a pomegranate. After that, he went down to the river bank, but not too 
near the bridge, and had a drink. The water was so nice that he took off his hot, dirty clothes and had a 
dip; for of course Shasta, having lived on the shore all his life, had learned to swim almost as soon as he 
had learned to walk. When he came out he lay on the grass looking across the water at Tashbaan - all the 
splendour and strength and glory of it. But that made him remember the dangers of it too. He suddenly 
realized that the others might have reached the Tombs while he was bathing ("and gone on without me, as 
likely as not"), so he dressed in a fright and tore back at such a speed that he was all hot and thirsty when 
he arrived and so the good of his bathe was gone. 
Like most days when you are alone and waiting for something this day seemed about a hundred hours 
long. He had plenty to think of, of course, but sitting alone, just thinking, is pretty slow. He thought a 
good deal about the Narnians and especially about Corin. He wondered what had happened when they 
discovered that the boy who had been lying on the sofa and hearing all their secret plans wasn't really 
Corin at all. It was very unpleasant to think of all those nice people imagining him a traitor. 
But as the sun slowly, slowly climbed up to the top of the sky and then slowly, slowly began going 
downwards to the West, and no one came and nothing at all happened, he began to get more and more 
anxious. And of course he now realized that when they arranged to wait for one another at the Tombs no 
one had said anything about How Long. He couldn't wait here for the rest of his life! And soon it would 
be dark again, and he would have another night just like last night. A dozen different plans went through 
his head, all wretched ones, and at last he fixed on the worst plan of all. He decided to wait till it was dark 
and then go back to the river and steal as many melons as he could carry and set out for Mount Pire alone, 
trusting for his direction to the line he had drawn that morning in the sand. It was a crazy idea and if he 
had read as many books as you have about journeys over deserts he would never have dreamed of it. But 
Shasta had read no books at all. 
Before the sun set something did happen. Shasta was sitting in the shadow of one of the Tombs when he 
looked up and saw two horses coming towards him. Then his heart gave a great leap, for he recognized 
them as Bree and Hwin. But the next moment his heart went down into his toes again. There was no sign 
of Aravis. The Horses were being led by a strange man, an armed man pretty handsomely dressed like an 
upper slave in a great family. Bree and Hwin were no longer got up like pack-horses, but saddled and 
bridled. And what could it all mean? "It's a trap," thought Shasta. "Somebody has caught Aravis and 
perhaps they've tortured her and she's given the whole thing away. They want me to jump out and run up 
and speak to Bree and then I'll be caught too! And yet if I don't, I may be losing my only chance to meet 
the others. Oh I do wish I knew what had happened." And he skulked behind the Tomb, looking out every 
few minutes, and wondering which was the least dangerous thing to do. 

WHAT had really happened was this. When Aravis saw Shasta hurried away by the Narnians and found 
herself alone with two horses who (very wisely) wouldn't say a word, she never lost her head even for a 
moment. She grabbed Bree's halter and stood still, holding both the horses; and though her heart was 
beating as hard as a hammer, she did nothing to show it. As soon as the Narnian lords had passed she tried 
to move on again. But before she could take a step, another crier ("Bother all these people" thought 
Aravis) was heard shouting out, "Way, way, way! Way for the Tarkheena Lasaraleen!" and immediately, 
following the crier, came four armed slaves and then four bearers carrying a litter which was all a-flutter 
with silken curtains and all a-jingle with silver bells and which scented the whole street with perfumes 
and flowers. After the litter, female slaves in beautiful clothes, and then a few grooms, runners, pages, and 
the like. And now Aravis made her first mistake. 
She knew Lasaraleen quite well - almost as if they had been at school together - because they had often 
stayed in the same houses and been to the same parties. And Aravis couldn't help looking up to see what 
Lasaraleen looked like now that she was married and a very great person indeed. 
It was fatal. The eyes of the two girls met. And immediately Lasaraleen sat up in the litter and burst out at 
the top of her voice. 
"Aravis! What on earth are you doing here? Your father-" 
There was not a moment to lose. Without a second's delay Aravis let go the Horses, caught the edge of 
the litter, swung herself up beside Lasaraleen and whispered furiously in her ear. 
"Shut up! Do you hear! Shut up. You must hide me. Tell your people-" 
"But darling-" began Lasaraleen in the same loud voice. (She didn't in the least mind making people 
stare; in fact she rather liked it.) 

"Do what I tell you or I'll never speak to you again," hissed Aravis. "Please, please be quick, Las. It's 
frightfully important. Tell your people to bring those two horses along. Pull all the curtains of the litter 
and get away somewhere where I can't be found. And do hurry." 
"All right, darling," said Lasaraleen in her lazy voice. "Here. Two of you take the Tarkheena's horses." 
(This was to the slaves.) "And now home. I say, darling, do you think we really want the curtains drawn 
on a day like this? I mean to say-" 
But Aravis had already drawn the curtains, enclosing Lasaraleen and herself in a rich and scented, but 
rather stuffy, kind of tent. 
"I mustn't be seen," "she said. "My father doesn't know I'm here. I'm running away." 
"My dear, how perfectly thrilling," said Lasaraleen. "I'm dying to hear all about it. Darling, you're sitting 
on my dress. Do you mind? That's better. It is a new one. Do you like it? I got it at-" 
"Oh, Las, do be serious," said Aravis. "Where is my father?" 
"Didn't you know?" said Lasaraleen. "He's here, of course. He came to town yesterday and is asking 
about you everywhere. And to think of you and me being here together and his not knowing anything 
about it! It's the funniest thing I ever heard." And she went off into giggles. She always had been a terrible 
giggler, as Aravis now remembered. 
"It isn't funny at all," she said. "It's dreadfully serious. Where can you hide me?" 
"No difficulty at all, my dear girl," said Lasaraleen. "I'll take you home. My husband's away and no one 
will see you. Phew! It's not much fun with the curtains drawn. I want to see people. There's no point in 
having a new dress on if one's to go about shut up like this." 
"I hope no one heard you when you shouted out to me like that," said Aravis. 

"No, no, of course, darling," said Lasaraleen absentmindedly. "But you haven't even told me yet what 
you think of the dress." 
"Another thing," said Aravis. "You must tell your people to treat those two horses very respectfully. 
That's part of the secret. They're really Talking Horses from Narnia." 
"Fancy!" said Lasaraleen. "How exciting! And oh, darling, have you seen the barbarian queen from 
Narnia? She's staying in Tashbaan at present. They say Prince Rabadash is madly in love with her. There 
have been the most wonderful parties and hunts and things all this last fortnight. I can't see that she's so 
very pretty myself. But some of the Narnian men are lovely. I was taken out on a river party the day 
before yesterday, and I was wearing my-" 
"How shall we prevent your people telling everyone that you've got a visitor - dressed like a beggar's brat 
- in your house? It might so easily get round to my father." 
"Now don't keep on fussing, there's a dear," said Lasaraleen. "We'll get you some proper clothes in a 
moment. And here we are!" 
The bearers had stopped and the litter was being lowered. When the curtains had been drawn Aravis 
found that she was in a courtyard-garden very like the one that Shasta had been taken into a few minutes 
earlier in another part of the city. Lasaraleen would have gone indoors at once but Aravis reminded her in 
a frantic whisper to say something to the slaves about not telling anyone of their mistress's strange visitor. 
"Sorry, darling, it had gone right out of my head," said Lasareleen. "Here. All of you. And you, 
doorkeeper. No one is to be let out of the house today. And anyone I catch talking about this young lady 
will be first beaten to death and then burned alive and after that be kept on bread and water for six weeks. 
There." 
Although Lasaraleen had said she was dying to hear Aravis's story, she showed no sign of really wanting 
to hear it at all. She was, in fact, much better at talking than at listening. She insisted on Aravis having a 
long and luxurious bath (Calormene baths are famous) and then dressing her up in the finest clothes 
before she would let her explain anything. The fuss she made about choosing the dresses nearly drove 
Aravis mad. She remembered now that Lasaraleen had always been like that, interested in clothes and 

parties and gossip. Aravis had always been more interested in bows and arrows and horses and dogs and 
swimming. You will guess that each thought the other silly. But when at last they were both seated after a 
meal (it was chiefly of the whipped cream and jelly and fruit and ice sort) in a beautiful pillared room 
(which Aravis would have liked better if Lasaraleen's spoiled pet monkey hadn't been climbing about it all 
the time) Lasaraleen at last asked her why she was running away from home. 
When Aravis had finished telling her story, Lasaraleen said, "But, darling, why don't you marry Ahoshta 
Tarkaan? Everyone's crazy about him. My husband says he is beginning to be one of the greatest men in 
Calormen. He has just been made Grand Vizier now old Axartha has died. Didn't you know?" 
"I don't care. I can't stand the sight of him," said Aravis. 
"But, darling, only think! Three palaces, and one of them that beautiful one down on the lake at Ilkeen. 
Positively ropes of pearls, I'm told. Baths of asses' milk. And you'd see such a lot of me." 
"He can keep his pearls and palaces as far as I'm concerned," said Aravis. 
"You always were a queer girl, Aravis," said Lasaraleen. "What more do you want?" 
In the end, however, Aravis managed to make her friend believe that she was in earnest and even to 
discuss plans. There would be no difficulty now about getting the two horses out of the North gate and 
then on to the Tombs. No one would stop or question a groom in fine clothes leading a war horse and a 
lady's saddle horse down to the river, and Lasaraleen had plenty of grooms to send. It wasn't so easy to 
decide what to do about Aravis herself. She suggested that she could be carried out in the litter with the 
curtains drawn. But Lasaraleen told her that litters were only used in the city and the sight of one going 
out through the gate would be certain to lead to questions. 
When they had talked for a long time - and it was all the longer because Aravis found it hard to keep her 
friend to the point-at last Lasaraleen clapped her hands and said, "Oh, I have an idea. There is one way of 
getting out of the city without using the gates. The Tisroc's garden (may he live for ever!) runs right down 
to the water and there is a little water-door. Only for the palace people of course - but then you know, dear 
(here she tittered a little) we almost are palace people. I say, it is lucky for you that you came to me. The 
dear Tisroc (may he live for ever!) is so kind. We're asked to the palace almost every day and it is like a 
second home. I love all the dear princes and princesses and I positively adore Prince Rabadash. I might 
run in and see any of the palace ladies at any hour of the day or night. Why shouldn't I slip in withyou, 
after dark, and let you out by the water-door? There are always a few punts and things tied up outside it. 

And even if we were caught-" 
"All would be lost," said Aravis. 
"Oh darling, don't get so excited," said Lasaraleen. "I was going to say, even if we were caught everyone 
would only say it was one of my mad jokes. I'm getting quite well known for them. Only the other day- do 
listen, dear, this is frightfully funny-" 
"I meant, all would be lost for me," said Aravis a little sharply. 
"Oh - ah - yes - I do see what you mean, darling. Well, can you think of any better plan?" 
Aravis couldn't, and answered, "No. We'll have to risk it. When can we start?" 
"Oh, not tonight," said Lasaraleen. "Of course not tonight. There's a great feast on tonight (I must start 
getting my hair done for it in a few minutes) and the whole place will be a blaze of lights. And such a 
crowd too! It would have to be tomorrow night." 
This was bad news for Aravis, but she had to make the best of it. The afternoon passed very slowly and it 
was a relief when Lasaraleen went out to the banquet, for Aravis was very tired of her giggling and her 
talk about dresses and parties, weddings and engagements and scandals. She went to bed early and that 
part she did enjoy: it was so nice to have pillows and sheets again. 
But the next day passed very slowly. Lasaraleen wanted to go back on the whole arrangement and kept 
on telling Aravis that Narnia was a country of perpetual snow and ice inhabited by demons and sorcerers, 
and she was mad to think of going there. "And with a peasant boy, too!" said Lasaraleen. "Darling, think 
of it! It's not Nice." Aravis had thought of it a good deal, but she was so tired of Lasaraleen's silliness by 
now that, for the first time, she began to think that travelling with Shasta was really rather more fun than 
fashionable life in Tashbaan. So she only replied, "You forget that I'll be nobody, just like him, when we 
get to Narnia. And anyway, I promised." 
"And to think," said Lasaraleen, almost crying, "that if only you had sense you could be the wife of a 

Grand Vizier!" Aravis went away to have a private word with the horses. 
"You must go with a groom a little before sunset down to the Tombs," she said. "No more of those packs. 
You'll be saddled and bridled again. But there'll have to be food in Hwin's saddle-bags and a full waterskin 
behind yours, Bree. The man has orders to let you both have a good long drink at the far side of the 
bridge." 
"And then, Narnia and the North!" whispered Bree. "But what if Shasta is not at the Tombs." 
"Wait for him of course," said Aravis. "I hope you've been quite comfortable." 
"Never better stabled in my life," said Bree. "But if the husband of that tittering Tarkheena friend of 
yours is paying his head groom to get the best oats, then I think the head groom is cheating him." 
Aravis and Lasaraleen had supper in the pillared room. 
About two hours later they were ready to start. Aravis was dressed to look like a superior slave-girl in a 
great house and wore a veil over her face. They had agreed that if any questions were asked Lasaraleen 
would pretend that Aravis was a slave she was taking as a present to one of the princesses. 
The two girls went out on foot. A very few minutes brought them to the palace gates. Here there were of 
course soldiers on guard but the officer knew Lasaraleen quite well and called his men to attention and 
saluted. They passed at once into the Hall of Black Marble. A fair number of courtiers, slaves and others 
were still moving about here but this only made the two girls less conspicuous. They passed on into the 
Hall of Pillars and then into the Hall of Statues and down the colonnade, passing the great beatencopper 
doors of the throne room. It was all magnificent beyond description; what they could see of it in the dim 
light of the lamps. 
Presently they came out into the garden-court which sloped downhill in a number of terraces. On the far 
side of that they came to the Old Palace. It had already grown almost quite dark and they now found 
themselves in a maze of corridors lit only by occasional torches fixed in brackets to the walls. Lasaraleen 
halted at a place where you had to go either left or right. 

"Go on, do go on," whispered Aravis, whose heart was beating terribly and who still felt that her father 
might run into them at any corner. 
"I'm just wondering..." said Lasaraleen. "I'm not absolutely sure which way we go from here. I think it's 
the left. Yes, I'm almost sure it's the left. What fun this is!" 
They took the left hand way and found themselves in a passage that was hardly lighted at all and which 
soon began going down steps. 
"It's all right," said Lasaraleen. "I'm sure we're right now. I remember these steps." But at that moment a 
moving light appeared ahead. A second later there appeared from round a distant corner, the dark shapes 
of two men walking backwards and carrying tall candles. And of course it is only before royalties that 
people walk backwards. Aravis felt Lasaraleen grip her arm - that sort of sudden grip which is almost a 
pinch and which means that the person who is gripping you is very frightened indeed. Aravis thought it 
odd that Lasaraleen should be so afraid of the Tisroc if he were really such a friend of hers, but there was 
no time to go on thinking. Lasaraleen was hurrying her back to the top of the steps, on tiptoes, and 
groping wildly along the wall. 
"Here's a door," she whispered. "Quick." 
They went in, drew the door very softly behind them, and found themselves in pitch darkness. Aravis 
could hear by Lasaraleen's breathing that she was terrified. 
"Tash preserve us!" whispered Lasaraleen. "What shall we do if he comes in here. Can we hide?" 
There was a soft carpet under their feet. They groped forward into the room and blundered on to a sofa. 
"Let's lie down behind it," whimpered Lasaraleen. "Oh, I do wish we hadn't come." 
There was just room between the sofa and the curtained wall and the two girls got down. Lasaraleen 
managed to get the better position and was completely covered. The upper part of Aravis's face stuck out 

beyond the sofa, so that if anyone came into that room with a light and happened to look in exactly the 
right place they would see her. But of course, because she was wearing a veil, what they saw would not at 
once look like a forehead and a pair of eyes. Aravis shoved desperately to try to make Lasaraleen give her 
a little more room. But Lasaraleen, now quite selfish in her panic, fought back and pinched her feet. They 
gave it up and lay still, panting a little. Their own breath semed dreadfully noisy, but there was no other 
noise. 
"Is it safe?" said Aravis at last in the tiniest possible whisper. 
"I - I - think so," began Lasaraleen. "But my poor nerves -" and then came the most terrible noise they 
could have heard at that moment: the noise of the door opening. And then came light. And because Aravis 
couldn't get her head any further in behind the sofa, she saw everything. 
First came the two slaves (deaf and dumb, as Aravis rightly guessed, and therefore used at the most secret 
councils) walking backwards and carrying the candles. They took up their stand one at each end of the 
sofa. This was a good thing, for of course it was now harder for anyone to see Aravis once a slave was in 
front of her and she was looking between his heels. Then came an old man, very fat, wearing a curious 
pointed cap by which she immediately knew that he was the Tisroc. The least of the jewels with which he 
was covered was worth more than all the clothes and weapons of the Narnian lords put together: but he 
was so fat and such a mass of frills and pleats and bobbles and buttons and tassels and talismans that 
Aravis couldn't help thinking the Narnian fashions (at any rate for men) looked nicer. After him came a 
tall young man with a feathered and jewelled turban on his head and an ivory-sheathed scimitar at his 
side. He seemed very excited and his eyes and teeth flashed fiercely in the candlelight. Last of all came a 
little hump-backed, wizened old man in whom she recognized with a shudder the new Grand Vizier and 
her own betrothed husband, Ahoshta Tarkaan himself. 
As soon as all three had entered the room and the door was shut, the Tisroc seated himself on the divan 
with a sigh of contentment, the young man took his place, standing before him, and the Grand Vizier got 
down on his knees and elbows and laid his face flat on the carpet. 

"OH-my-father-and-oh-the-delight-of-my-eyes," began the young man, muttering the words very quickly 
and sulkily and not at all as if the Tisroc were the delight of his eyes. "May you live for ever, but you have 
utterly destroyed me. If you had given me the swiftest of the galleys at sunrise when I first saw that the 
ship of the accursed barbarians was gone from her place I would perhaps have overtaken them. But you 
persuaded me to send first and see if they had not merely moved round the point into better anchorage. 
And now the whole day has been wasted. And they are gone - gone - out of my reach! The false jade, the- 
" and here he added a great many descriptions of Queen Susan which would not look at all nice in print. 
For of course this young man was Prince Rabadash and of course the false jade was Susan of Narnia. 
"Compose yourself, O my son," said the Tisroc. "For the departure of guests makes a wound that is easily 
healed in the heart of a judicious host." 
"But I want her," cried the Prince. "I must have her. I shall die if I do not get her- false, proud, blackhearted 
daughter of a dog that she is! I cannot sleep and my food has no savour and my eyes are darkened 
because of her beauty. I must have the barbarian queen." 
"How well it was said by a gifted poet," observed the Vizier, raising his face (in a somewhat dusty 
condition) from the carpet, "that deep draughts from the fountain of reason are desirable in order to 
extinguish the fire of youthful love." 
This seemed to exasperate the Prince. "Dog," he shouted, directing a series of well-aimed kicks at the 
hindquarters of the Vizier, "do not dare to quote the poets to me. I have had maxims and verses flung at 
me all day and I can endure them no more." I am afraid Aravis did not feel at all sorry for the Vizier. 
The Tisroc was apparently sunk in thought, but when, after a long pause, he noticed what was happening, 
he said tranquilly: 
"My son, by all means desist from kicking the venerable and enlightened Vizier: for as a costly jewel 
retains its value even if hidden in a dung-hill, so old age and discretion are to be respected even in the vile 
persons of our subjects. Desist therefore, and tell us what you desire and propose." 
"I desire and propose, O my father," said Rabadash, "that you immediately call out your invincible 
armies and invade the thrice-accursed land of Narnia and waste it with fire and sword and add it to your 
illimitable empire, killing their High King and all of his blood except the queen Susan. For I must have 
her as my wife, though she shall learn a sharp lesson first." 

"Understand, O my son," said the Tisroc, "that no words you can speak will move me to open war against 
Narnia." 
"If you were not my father, O ever-living Tisroc, " said the Prince, grinding his teeth, "I should say that 
was the word of a coward." 
"And if you were not my son, O most inflammable Rabadash," replied his father, "your life would be 
short and your death slow when you had said it." (The cool, placid voice in which he spoke these words 
made Aravis's blood run cold.) 
"But why, O my father," said the Prince - this time in a much more respectful voice, "why should we 
think twice about punishing Narnia any more than about hanging an idle slave or sending a worn-out 
horse to be made into dog'smeat? It is not the fourth size of one of your least provinces. A thousand spears 
could conquer it in five weeks. It is an unseemly blot on the skirts of your empire." 
"Most undoubtedly," said the Tisroc. "These little barbarian countries that call themselves free (which is 
as much as to say, idle, disordered, and unprofitable) are hateful to the gods and to all persons of 
discernment." 
"Then why have we suffered such a land as Narnia to remain thus long unsubdued?" 
"Know, O enlightened Prince," said the Grand Vizier, "that until the year in which your exalted father 
began his salutary and unending reign, the land of Narnia was covered with ice and snow and was 
moreover ruled by a most powerful enchantress." 
"This I know very well, O loquacious Vizier," answered the Prince. "But I know also that the enchantress 
is dead. And the ice and snow have vanished, so that Narnia is now wholesome, fruitful, and delicious." 
"And this change, O most learned Prince, has doubtless been brought to pass by the powerful incantations 
of those wicked persons who now call themselves kings and queens of Narnia." 

"I am rather of the opinion," said Rabadash, "that it has come about by the alteration of the stars and the 
operation of natural causes." 
"All this," said the Tisroc, "is a question for the disputations of learned men. I will never believe that so 
great an alteration, and the killing of the old enchantress, were effected without the aid of strong magic. 
And such things are to be expected in that land, which is chiefly inhabited by demons in the shape of 
beasts that talk like men, and monsters that are half man and half beast. It is commonly reported that the 
High King of Narnia (whom may the gods utterly reject) is supported by a demon of hideous aspect and 
irresistible maleficence who appears in the shape of a Lion. Therefore the attacking of Narnia is a dark 
and doubtful enterprise, and I am determined not to put my hand out farther than I can draw it back." 
"How blessed is Calormen," said the Vizier, popping up his face again, "on whose ruler the gods have 
been pleased to bestow prudence and circumspection! Yet as the irrefutable and sapient Tisroc has said it 
is very grievous to be constrained to keep our hands off such a dainty dish as Narnia. Gifted was that poet 
who said -" but at this point Ahoshta noticed an impatient movement of the Prince's toe and became 
suddenly silent. 
"It is very grievous," said the Tisroc in his deep, quiet voice. "Every morning the sun is darkened in my 
eyes, and every night my sleep is the less refreshing, because I remember that Narnia is still free." 
"O my father," said Rabadash. "How if I show you a way by which you can stretch out your arm to take 
Narnia and yet draw it back unharmed if the attempt prove unfortunate?" 
"If you can show me that, O Rabadash," said the Tisroc, "you will be the best of sons." 
"Hear then, 0 father. This very night and in this hour I will take but two hundred horse and ride across the 
desert. And it shall seem to all men that you know nothing of my going. On the second morning I shall be 
at the gates of King Lune's castle of Anvard in Archenland. They are at peace with us and unprepared and 
I shall take Anvard before they have bestirred themselves. Then I will ride through the pass above Anvard 
and down through Narnia to Cair Paravel. The High King will not be there; when I left them he was 
already preparing a raid against the giants on his northern border. I shall find Cair Paravel, most likely 
with open gates, and ride in. I shall exercise prudence and courtesy and spill as little Narnian blood as I 
can. And what then remains but to sit there till the Splendour Hyaline puts in, with Queen Susan on board, 
catch my strayed bird as she sets foot ashore, swing her into the saddle, and then, ride, ride, ride back to 
Anvard?" 

"But is it not probable, O my son," said the Tisroc, "that at the taking of the woman either King Edmund 
or you will lose his life?" 
"They will be a small company," said Rabadash, "and I will order ten of my men to disarm and bind him: 
restraining my vehement desire for his blood so that there shall be no deadly cause of war between you 
and the High King." 
"And how if the Splendour Hyaline is at Cair Paravel before you?" 
"I do not look for that with these winds, O my father." 
"And lastly, O my resourceful son," said the Tisroc, "you have made clear how all this might give you the 
barbarian woman, but not how it helps me to the over-throwing of Narnia." 
"O my father, can it have escaped you that though I and my horsemen will come and go through Narnia 
like an arrow from a bow, yet we shall have Anvard for ever? And when you hold Anvard you sit in the 
very gate of Narnia, and your garrison in Anvard can be increased by little and little till it is a great host." 
"It is spoken with understanding and foresight. But how do I draw back my arm if all this miscarries?" 
"You shall say that I, did it without your knowledge and against your will, and without your blessing, 
being constrained by the violence of my love and the impetuosity of youth." 
"And how if the High King then demands that we send back the barbarian woman, his sister?" 
"O my father, be assured that he will not. For though the fancy of a woman has rejected this marriage, the 
High King Peter is a man of prudence and understanding who will in no way wish to lose the high honour 
and advantage of being allied to our House and seeing his nephew and grand nephew on the throne of 
Calormen." 

"He will not see that if I live for ever as is no doubt your wish," said the Tisroc in an even drier voice 
than usual. 
"And also, O my father and O the delight of my eyes," said the Prince, after a moment of awkward 
silence, "we shall write letters as if from the Queen to say that she loves me and has no desire to return to 
Narnia. For it is well known that women are as changeable as weathercocks. And even if they do not 
wholly believe the letters, they will not dare to come to Tashbaan in arms to fetch her." 
"O enlightened Vizier," said the Tisroc, "bestow your wisdom upon us concerning this strange proposal." 
"O eternal Tisroc," answered Ahosta, "the strength of paternal affection is not unknown to me and I have 
often heard that sons are in the eyes of their fathers more precious than carbuncles. How then shall I dare 
freely to unfold to you my mind in a matter which may imperil the life of this exalted Prince?" 
"Undoubtedly you will dare," replied the Tisroc. 
"Because you will find that the dangers of not doing so are at least equally great." 
"To hear is to obey," moaned the wretched man. "Know then, O most reasonable Tisroc, in the first 
place, that the danger of the Prince is not altogether so great as might appear. For the gods have withheld 
from the barbarians the light of discretion, as that their poetry is not, like ours, full of choice apophthegms 
and useful maxims, but is all of love and war. Therefore nothing will appear to them more noble and 
admirable than such a mad enterprise as this of ow!" For the Prince, at the word "mad", had kicked him 
again. 
"Desist, O my son," said the Tisroc. "And you, estimable Vizier, whether he desists or not, by no means 
allow the flow of your eloquence to be interrupted. For nothing is more suitable to persons of gravity and 
decorum than to endure minor inconveniences with constancy." 
"To hear is to obey," said the Vizier, wriggling himself round a little so as to get his hinder parts further 
away from Rabadash's toe. "Nothing, I say, will seem as pardonable, if not estimable, in their eyes as this 
- er - hazardous attempt, especially because it is undertaken for the love of a woman. Therefore, if the 

Prince by misfortune fell into their hands, they would assuredly not kill him. Nay, it may even be, that 
though he failed to carry off the queen, yet the sight of his great valour and of the extremity of his passion 
might incline her heart to him." 
"That is a good point, old babbler," said Rabadash. "Very good, however it came into your ugly head." 
"The praise of my masters is the light of my eyes," said Ahoshta. "And secondly, O Tisroc, whose reign 
must and shall be interminable, I think that with the aid of the gods it is very likely that Anvard will fall 
into the Prince's hands. And if so, we have Narnia by the throat." 
There was a long pause and the room became so silent that the two girls hardly dared to breathe. At last 
the Tisroc spoke. 
"Go, my son," he said. "And do as you have said. But expect no help nor countenance from me. I will not 
avenge you if you are killed and I will not deliver you if the barbarians cast you into prison. And if, either 
in success or failure, you shed a drop more than you need of Narnian noble blood and open war arises 
from it, my favour shall never fall upon you again and your next brother shall have your place in 
Calormen. Now go. Be swift, secret, and fortunate. May the strength of Tash the inexorable, the 
irresistible be in your sword and lance." 
"To hear is to obey," cried Rabadash, and after kneeling for a moment to kiss his father's hands he rushed 
from the room. Greatly to the disappointment of Aravis, who was now horribly cramped, the Tisroc and 
Vizier remained. 
"O Vizier," said the Tisroc, "is it certain that no living soul knows of this council we three have held here 
tonight?" 
"O my master," said Ahoshta, "it is not possible that any should know. For that very reason I proposed, 
and you in your wisdom agreed, that we should meet here in the Old Palace where no council is ever held 
and none of the household has any occasion to come." 
"It is well," said the Tisroc. "If any man knew, I would see to it that he died before an hour had passed. 
And do you also, O prudent Vizier, forget it. I sponge away from my own heart and from yours all 
knowledge of the Prince's plans. He is gone without my knowledge or my consent, I know not whither, 

because of his violence and the rash and disobedient disposition of youth. No man will be more 
astonished than you and I to hear that Anvard is in his hands." 
"To hear is to obey," said Ahoshta. 
"That is why you will never think even in your secret heart that I am the hardest hearted of fathers who 
thus send my first-born son on an errand so likely to be his death; pleasing as it must be to you who do not 
love the Prince. For 1 see into the bottom of your mind." 
"O impeccable Tisroc," said the Vizier. "In comparison with you I love neither the Prince nor my own 
life nor bread nor water nor the light of the sun." 
"Your sentiments," said the Tisroc, "are elevated and correct. I also love none of these things in 
comparison with the glory and strength of my throne. If the Prince succeeds, we have Archenland, and 
perhaps hereafter Narnia. If he fails - I have eighteen other sons and Rabadash, after the manner of the 
eldest sons of kings, was beginning to be dangerous. More than five Tisrocs in Tashbaan have died before 
their time because their eldest sons, enlightened princes, grew tired of waiting for their throne. He had 
better cool his blood abroad than boil it in inaction here. And now, O excellent Vizier, the excess of my 
paternal anxiety inclines me to sleep. Command the musicians to my chamber. But before you lie down, 
call back the pardon we wrote for the third cook. I feel within me the manifest prognostics of indigestion." 
"To hear is to obey," said the Grand Vizier. He crawled backwards on all fours to the door, rose, bowed, 
and went out. Even then the Tisroc remained seated in silence on the divan till Aravis almost began to be 
afraid that he had dropped asleep. But at last with a great creaking and sighing he heaved up his enormous 
body, signed to the slaves to precede him with the lights, and went out. The door closed behind him, the 
room was once more totally dark, and the two girls could breathe freely again. 

"Hove dreadful! How perfectly dreadful!" whimpered Lasaraleen. "Oh darling, I am so frightened. I'm 
shaking all over. Feel me." 
"Come on," said Aravis, who was trembling herself. "They've gone back to the new palace. Once we're 
out of this room we're safe enough. But it's wasted a terrible time. Get me down to that water-gate as 
quick as you can." 
"Darling, how can you?" squeaked Lasaraleen. "I can't do anything - not now. My poor nerves! No: we 
must just lie still a bit and then go back." 
"Why back?" asked Aravis. 
"Oh, you don't understand. You're so unsympathetic," said Lasaraleen, beginning to cry. Aravis decided 
it was no occasion for mercy. 
"Look here!" she said, catching Lasaraleen and giving her a good shake. "If you say another word about 
going back, and if you don't start taking me to that water-gate at once - do you know what I'll do? I'll rush 
out into that passage and scream. Then we'll both be caught." 
"But we shall both be k-k-killed!" said Lasaraleen. "Didn't you hear what the Tisroc (may he live for 
ever) said?" 
"Yes, and I'd sooner be killed than married to Ahoshta. So come on." 
"Oh you are unkind," said Lasaraleen. "And I in such a state!" 
But in the end she had to give in to Aravis. She led the way down the steps they had already descended, 
and along another corridor and so finally out into the open air. They were now in the palace garden which 
sloped down in terraces to the city wall. The moon shone brightly. One of the drawbacks about adventures 
is that when you come to the most beautiful places you are often too anxious and hurried to appreciate 
them; so that Aravis (though she remembered them years later) had only a vague impression of grey 
lawns, quietly bubbling fountains, and the long black shadows of cypress trees. 

When they re"ached the very bottom and the wall rose frowning above them, Lasaraleen was shaking so 
that she could not unbolt the gate. Aravis did it. There, at last, was the river, full of reflected moonlight, 
and a little landing stage and a few pleasure boats. 
"Good-bye," said Aravis, "and thank you. I'm sorry if I've been a pig. But think what I'm flying from!" 
"Oh Aravis darling," said Lasaraleen. "Won't you change your mind? Now that you've seen what a very 
great man Ahoshta is!" 
"Great man!" said Aravis. "A hideous grovelling slave who flatters when he's kicked but treasures it all 
up and hopes to get his own back by egging on that horrible Tisroc to plot his son's death. Faugh! I'd 
sooner marry my father's scullion than a creature like that." 
"Oh Aravis, Aravis! How can you say such dreadful things; and about the Tisroc (may he live for ever) 
too. It must be right if he's going to do it!" 
"Good-bye," said Aravis, "and I thought your dresses lovely. And I think your house is lovely too. I'm 
sure you'll have a lovely life - though it wouldn't suit me. Close the door softly behind me." 
She tore herself away from her friend's affectionate embraces, stepped into a punt, cast off, and a moment 
later was out in midstream with a huge real moon overhead and a huge reflected moon down, deep down, 
in the river. The air was fresh and cool and as she drew near the farther bank she heard the hooting of an 
owl. "Ah! That's better!" thought Aravis. She had always lived in the country and had hated every minute 
of her time in Tashbaan. 
When she stepped ashore she found herself in darkness for the rise of the ground, and the trees, cut off 
the moonlight. But she managed to find the same road that Shasta had found, and came just as he had 
done to the end of. the grass and the beginning of the sand, and looked (like him) to her left and saw the 
big, black Tombs. And now at last, brave girl though she was, her heart quailed. Supposing the others 
weren't there! Supposing the ghouls were! But she stuck out her chin (and a little bit of her tongue too) 
and went straight towards them. 

But before she had reached them she saw Bree and Hwin and the groom. 
"You can go back to your mistress now," said Aravis (quite forgetting that he couldn't, until the city gates 
opened next morning). "Here is money for your pains." 
"To hear is to obey," said the groom, and at once set off at a remarkable speed in the direction of the city. 
There was no need to tell him to make haste: he also had been thinking a good deal about ghouls. 
For the next few seconds Aravis was busy kissing the noses and patting the necks of Hwin and Bree just 
as if they were quite ordinary horses. 
"And here comes Shasta! Thanks be to the Lion!" said Bree. 
Aravis looked round, and there, right enough, was Shasta who had come out of hiding the moment he 
saw the groom going away. 
"And now," said Aravis. "There's not a moment to lose." And in hasty words she told them about 
Rabadash's expedition. 
"Treacherous hounds!" said Bree, shaking his mane and stamping with his hoof. "An attack in time of 
peace, without defiance sent! But we'll grease his oats for him. We'll be there before he is." 
"Can we?" said Aravis, swinging herself into Hwin's saddle. Shasta wished he could mount like that. 
"Brooh-hoo!" snorted Bree. "Up you get, Shasta. Can we! And with a good start too!" 
"He said he was going to start at once," said Aravis. 

"That's how humans talk," said Bree. "But you don't get a company of two hundred horse and horsemen 
watered and victualled and armed and saddled and started all in a minute. Now: what's our direction? Due 
North? 
"No," said Shasta. "I know about that. I've drawn a line. I'll explain later. Bear a bit to our left, both you 
horses. Ah here it is!" 
"Now," said Bree. "All that about galloping for a day and a night, like in stories, can't really be done. It 
must be walk and trot: but brisk trots and short walks. And whenever we walk you two humans can slip 
off and walk too. Now. Are you ready, Hwin? Off we go. Narnia and the North!" 
At first it was delightful. The night had now been going on for so many hours that the sand had almost 
finished giving back all the sun-heat it had received during the day, and the air was cool, fresh, and clear. 
Under the moonlight the sand, in every direction and as far as they could see, gleamed as if it were 
smooth water or a great silver tray. Except for the noise of Bree's and Hwin's hoofs there was not a sound 
to be heard. Shasta would nearly have fallen asleep if he had not had to dismount and walk every now and 
then. 
This seemed to last for hours. Then there came a time when there was no longer any moon. They seemed 
to ride in the dead darkness for hours and hours. And after that there came a moment when Shasta noticed 
that he could see Bree's neck and head in front of him a little more clearly than before; and slowly, very 
slowly, he began to notice the vast grey flatness on every side. It looked absolutely dead, like something 
in a dead world; and Shasta felt quite terribly tired and noticed that he was getting cold and that his lips 
were dry. And all the time the squeak of the leather, the jingle of the bits, and the noise of the hoofs-not 
Propputtypropputty as it would be on a hard road, but Thubbudythubbudy on the dry sand. 
At last, after hours of riding, far away on his right there came a single long streak of paler grey, low 
down on the horizon. Then a streak of red. It was the morning at last, but without a single bird to sing 
about it. He was glad of the walking bits now, for he was colder than ever. 
Then suddenly the sun rose and everything changed in a moment. The grey sand turned yellow and 
twinkled as if it was strewn with diamonds. On their left the shadows of Shasta and Hwin and Bree and 
Aravis, enormously long, raced beside them. The double peak of Mount Pire, far ahead, flashed in the 
sunlight and Shasta saw they were a little out of the course. "A bit left, a bit left," he sang out. Best of all, 
when you looked back, Tashbaan was already small and remote. The Tombs were quite invisible: 
swallowed up in that single, jagged-edged hump which was the city of the Tisroc. Everyone felt better. 

But not for long. Though Tashbaan looked very far away when they first saw it, it refused to look any 
further away as they went on. Shasta gave up looking back at it, for it only gave him the feeling that they 
were not moving at all. Then the light became a nuisance. The glare of the sand made his eyes ache: but 
he knew he mustn't shut them. He must screw them up and keep on looking ahead at Mount Pire and 
shouting out directions. Then came the heat. He noticed it for the first time when he had to dismount and 
walk: as he slipped down to the sand the heat from it struck up into his face as if from the opening of an 
oven door. Next time it was worse. But the third time, as his bare feet touched the sand he screamed with 
pain and got one foot back in the stirrup and the other half over Bree's back before you could have said 
knife. 
"Sorry, Bree," he gasped. "I can't walk. It burns my feet." "Of course!" panted Bree. "Should have 
thought of that myself. Stay on. Can't be helped." 
"It's all right for you," said Shasta to Aravis who was walking beside Hwin. "You've got shoes on." 
Aravis said nothing and looked prim. Let's hope she didn't mean to, but she did. 
On again, trot and walk and trot, jingle-jingle-jingle, squeak-squeak-squeak, smell of hot horse, smell of 
hot self, blinding glare, headache. And nothing at all different for mile after mile. Tashbaan would never 
look any further away. The mountains would never look any nearer. You felt this had been going on for 
always - jingle-jingle-jingle, squeaksqueak-squeak, smell of hot horse, smell of hot self. 
Of course one tried all sorts of games with oneself to try to make the time pass: and of course they were 
all no good. And one tried very hard not to think of drinks-iced sherbet in a palace in Tashbaan, clear 
spring water tinkling with a dark earthy sound, cold, smooth milk just creamy enough and not too creamy 
- and the harder you tried not to think, the more you thought. 
At last there was something different - a mass of rock sticking up out of the sand about fifty yards long 
and thirty feet high. It did not cast much shadow, for the sun was now very high, but it cast a little. Into 
that shade they crowded. There they ate some food and drank a little water. It is not easy giving a horse a 
drink out of a skin bottle, but Bree and Hwin were clever with their lips. No one had anything like 
enough. No one spoke. The Horses were flecked with foam and their breathing was noisy. The children 
were pale. 

After a very short rest they went on again. Same noises, same smells, same glare, till at last their shadows 
began to fall on their right, and then got longer and longer till they seemed to stretch out to the Eastern 
end of the world. Very slowly the sun drew nearer to the Western horizon. And now at last he was down 
and, thank goodness, the merciless glare was gone, though the heat coming up from the sand was still as 
bad as ever. Four pairs of eyes were looking out eagerly for any sign of the valley that Sallowpad the 
Raven had spoken about. But, mile after mile, there was nothing but level sand. And now the day was 
quite definitely done, and most of the stars were out, and still the Horses thundered on and the children 
rose and sank in their saddles, miserable with thirst and weariness. Not till the moon had risen did Shasta - 
in the strange, barking voice of someone whose mouth is perfectly dry-shout out: 
"There it is!" 
There was no mistaking it now. Ahead, and a little to their right, there was at last a slope: a slope 
downward and hummocks of rock on each side. The Horses were far too tired to speak but they swung 
round towards it and in a minute or two they were entering the gully. At first it was worse in there than it 
had been out in the open desert, for there was a breathless stuffiness between the rocky walls and less 
moonlight. The slope continued steeply downwards and the rocks on either hand rose to the height of 
cliffs. Then they began to meet vegetation - prickly cactus-like plants and coarse grass of the kind that 
would prick your fingers. Soon the horse-hoofs were falling on pebbles and stones instead of sand. Round 
every bend of the valley - and it had many bends - they looked eagerly for water. The Horses were nearly 
at the end of their strength now, and Hwin, stumbling and panting; was lagging behind Bree. They were 
almost in despair before at last they came to a little muddiness and a tiny trickle of water through softer 
and better grass. And the trickle became a brook, and the brook became a stream with bushes on each 
side, and the stream became a river and there came (after more disappointments than I could possibly 
describe) -a moment when Shasta, who had been in a kind of doze, suddenly realized that Bree had 
stopped and found himself slipping off. Before them a little cataract of water poured into a broad pool: 
and both the Horses were already in the pool with their heads down, drinking, drinking, drinking. "O-ooh," 
said Shasta and plunged in - it was about up to his knees - and stooped his head right into the 
cataract. It was perhaps the loveliest moment in his life. 
It was about ten minutes later when all four of them (the two children wet nearly all over) came out and 
began to notice their surroundings. The moon was now high enough to peep down into the valley. There 
was soft grass on both sides of the river, and beyond the grass, trees and bushes sloped up to the bases of 
the cliffs. There must have been some wonderful flowering shrubs hidden in that shadowy undergrowth 
for the whole glade was full of the coolest and most delicious smells. And out of the darkest recess among 
the trees there came a sound Shasta had never heard beforea nightingale. 
Everyone was much too tired to speak or to eat. The Horses, without waiting to be unsaddled, lay down 
at once. So did Aravis and Shasta. 

About ten minutes later the careful Hwin said, "But we mustn't go to sleep. We've got to keep ahead of 
that Rabadash." 
"No," said Bree very slowly. "Mustn't go sleep. Just a little rest." 
Shasta knew (for a moment) that they would all go to sleep if he didn't get up and do something about it, 
and felt that he ought to. In fact he decided that he would get up and persuade them to go on. But 
presently; not yet: not just yet... 
Very soon the moon shone and the nightingale sang over two horses and two human children, all fast 
asleep. 
It was Aravis who awoke first. The sun was already high in the heavens and the cool morning hours were 
already wasted. "It's my fault," she said to herself furiously as she jumped up and began rousing the 
others. "One wouldn't expect Horses to keep awake after a day's work like that, even if they can talk. And 
of course that Boy wouldn't; he's had no decent training. But I ought to have known better." 
The others were dazed and stupid with the heaviness of their sleep. 
"Neigh-ho - broo-hoo," said Bree. "Been sleeping in my saddle, eh? I'll never do that again. Most 
uncomfortable-" 
"Oh come on, come on," said Aravis. "We've lost half the morning already. There isn't a moment to 
spare." 
"A fellow's got to have a mouthful of grass," said Bree. 
I'm afraid we can't wait," said Aravis. 
"What's the terrible hurry?" said Bree. "We've crossed the desert, haven't we?" 

"But we're not in Archenland yet," said Aravis. "And we've got to get there before Rabadash." 
"Oh, we must be miles ahead of him," said Bree. "Haven't we been coming a shorter way? Didn't that 
Raven friend of yours say this was a short cut, Shasta?" 
"He didn't say anything about shorter," answered Shasta. "He only said better, because you got to a river 
this way. If the oasis is due North of Tashbaan, then I'm afraid this may be longer." 
"Well I can't go on without a snack," said Bree. "Take my bridle off, Shasta." 
"P-please," said Hwin, very shyly, "I feel just like Bree that I can't go on. But when Horses have humans 
(with spurs and things) on their backs, aren't they often made to go on when they're feeling like this? and 
then they find they can. I m-mean - oughtn't we to be able to do even more, now that we're free. It's all for 
Narnia." 
"I think, Ma'am," said Bree very crushingly, "that I know a little more about campaigns and forced 
marches and what a horse can stand than you do." 
To this Hwin made no answer, being, like most highly bred mares, a very nervous and gentle person who 
was easily put down. In reality she was quite right, and if Bree had had a Tarkaan on his back at that 
moment to make him go on, he would have found that he was good for several hours' hard going. But one 
of the worst results of being a slave and being forced to do things is that when there is no one to force you 
any more you find you have almost lost the power of forcing yourself. 
So they had to wait while Bree had a snack and a drink, and of course Hwin and the children had a snack 
and a drink too. It must have been nearly eleven o'clock in the morning before they finally got going 
again. And even then Bree took things much more gently than yesterday. It was really Hwin, though she 
was the weaker and more tired of the two, who set the pace. 
The valley itself, with its brown, cool river, and grass and moss and wild flowers and rhododendrons, 
was such a pleasant place that it made you want to ride slowly. 

AFTER they had ridden for several hours down the valley, it widened out and they could see what was 
ahead of them. The river which they had been following here joined a broader river, wide and turbulent, 
which flowed from their left to their right, towards the east. Beyond this new river a delightful country 
rose gently in low hills, ridge beyond ridge, to the Northern Mountains themselves. To the right there 
were rocky pinnacles, one or two of them with snow clinging to the ledges. To the left, pine-clad slopes, 
frowning cliffs, narrow gorges, and blue peaks stretched away as far as the eye could reach. He could no 
longer make out Mount Pire. Straight ahead the mountain range sank to a wooded saddle which of course 
must be the pass from Archenland into Narnia. 
"Broo-hoo-hoo, the North, the green North!" neighed Bree: and certainly the lower hills looked greener 
and fresher than anything that Aravis and Shasta, with their southern-bred eyes, had ever imagined. Spirits 
rose as they clattered down to the water's-meet of the two rivers. 
The eastern-flowing river, which was pouring from the higher mountains at the western end of the range, 
was far too swift and too broken with rapids for them to think of swimming it; but after some casting 
about, up and down the bank, they found a place shallow enough to wade. The roar and clatter of water, 
the great swirl against the horses' fetlocks, the cool, stirring air and the darting dragon-flies, filled Shasta 
with a strange excitement. 
"Friends, we are in Archenland!" said Bree proudly as he splashed and churned his way out on the 
Northern bank. "I think that river we've just crossed is called the Winding Arrow." 
"I hope we're in time," murmured Hwin. 
Then they began going up, slowly and zigzagging a good deal, for the hills were steep. It was all open 
park-like country with no roads or houses in sight. Scattered trees, never thick enough to be a forest, were 

everywhere. Shasta, who had lived all his life in an almost tree-less grassland, had never seen so many or 
so many kinds. If you had been there you would probably have known (he didn't) that he was seeing oaks, 
beeches, silver birches, rowans, and sweet chestnuts. Rabbits scurried away in every direction as they 
advanced, and presently they saw a whole herd of fallow deer making off among the trees. 
"Isn't it simply glorious!" said Aravis. 
At the first ridge Shasta turned in the saddle and looked back. There was no sign of Tashbaan; the desert, 
unbroken except by the narrow green crack which they had travelled down, spread to the horizon. 
"Hullo!" he said suddenly. "What's that!" 
"What's what?" said Bree, turning round. Hwin and Aravis did the same. 
"That," said Shasta, pointing. "It looks like smoke. Is it a fire?" 
"Sand-storm, I should say," said Bree. 
"Not much wind to raise it," said Aravis. 
"Oh!" exclaimed Hwin. "Look! There are things flashing in it. Look! They're helmets - and armour. And 
it's moving: moving this way." 
"By Tash!" said Aravis. "It's the army. It's Rabadash." 
"Oh course it is," said Hwin. "Just what I was afraid of. Quick! We must get to Anvard before it." And 
without another word she whisked round and began galloping North. Bree tossed his head and did the 
same. 

"Come on, Bree, come on," yelled Aravis over her shoulder. 
The race was very gruelling for the Horses. As they topped each ridge they found another valley and 
another ridge beyond it; and though they knew they were going in more or less the right direction, no one 
knew how far it was to Anvard. From the top of the second ridge Shasta looked back again. Instead of a 
dust-cloud well out in the desert he now saw a black, moving mass, rather like ants, on the far bank of the 
Winding Arrow. They were doubtless looking for a ford. 
"They're on the river!" he yelled wildly. 
"Quick! Quick!" shouted Aravis. "We might as well not have come at all if we don't reach Anvard in 
time. Gallop, Bree, gallop. Remember you're a war-horse." 
It was all Shasta could do to prevent himself from shouting out similar instructions; but he thought, "The 
poor chap's doing all he can already," and held his tongue. And certainly both Horses were doing, if not 
all they could, all they thought they could; which is not quite the same thing. Bree had caught up with 
Hwin and they thundered side by side over the turf. It didn't look as if Hwin could possibly keep it up 
much longer. 
At that moment everyone's feelings were completely altered by a sound from behind. It was not the sound 
they had been expecting to hear - the noise of hoofs and jingling armour, mixed, perhaps, with Calormene 
battle-cries. Yet Shasta knew it at once. It was the same snarling roar he had heard that moonlit night 
when they first met Aravis and Hwin. Bree knew it too. His eyes gleamed red and his ears lay flat back on 
his skull. And Bree now discovered that he had not really been going as fast - not quite as fast - as he 
could. Shasta felt the change at once. Now they were really going all out. In a few seconds they were well 
ahead of Hwin. 
"It's not fair," thought Shasta. "I did think we'd be safe from lions here!" 
He looked over his shoulder. Everything was only too clear. A huge tawny creature, its body low to the 
ground, like a cat streaking across the lawn to a tree when a strange dog has got into the garden, was 
behind them. And it was nearer every second and half second. 

He looked forward again and saw something which he did not take in, or even think about. Their way 
was barred by a smooth green wall about ten feet high. In the middle of that wall there was a gate, open. 
In the middle of the gateway stood a tall man dressed, down to his bare feet, in a robe coloured like 
autumn leaves, leaning on a straight staff. His beard fell almost to his knees. 
Shasta saw all this in a glance and looked back again. The lion had almost got Hwin now. It was making 
snaps at her hind legs, and there was no hope now in her foamflecked, wide-eyed face. 
"Stop," bellowed Shasta in Bree's ear. "Must go back. Must help!" 
Bree always said afterwards that he never heard, or never understood this; and as he was in general a very 
truthful horse we must accept his word. 
Shasta slipped his feet out of the stirrups, slid both his legs over the left side, hesitated for one hideous 
hundredth of a second, and jumped. It hurt horribly and nearly winded him; but before he knew how it 
hurt him he was staggering back to help Aravis. He had never done anything like this in his life before 
and hardly knew why he was doing it now. 
One of the most terrible noises in the world, a horse's scream, broke from Hwin's lips. Aravis was 
stooping low over Hwin's neck and seemed to be trying to draw her sword. And now all three - Aravis, 
Hwin, and the lion were almost on top of Shasta. Before they reached him the lion rose on its hind legs, 
larger than you would have believed a lion could be, and jabbed at Aravis with its right paw. Shasta could 
see all the terrible claws extended. Aravis screamed and reeled in the saddle. The lion was tearing her 
shoulders. Shasta, half mad with horror, managed to lurch towards the brute. He had no weapon, not even 
a stick or a stone. He shouted out, idiotically, at the lion as one would at a dog. "Go home! Go home!" For 
a fraction of a second he was staring right into its wideopened, raging mouth. Then, to his utter 
astonishment, the lion, still on its hind legs, checked itself suddenly, turned head over heels, picked itself 
up, and rushed away. 
Shasta did not for a moment suppose it had gone for good. He turned and raced for the gate in the green 
wall which, now for the first time, he remembered seeing. Hwin, stumbling and nearly fainting, was just 
entering the gate: Aravis still kept her seat but her back was covered with blood. 
"Come in, my daughter, come in," the robed and bearded man was saying, and then "Come in, my son" as 
Shasta panted up to him. He heard the gate closed behind him; and the bearded stranger was already 
helping Aravis off her horse. 

They were in a wide and perfectly circular enclosure, protected by a high wall of green turf. A pool of 
perfectly still water, so full that the water was almost exactly level with the ground, lay before him. At 
one end of the pool, completely overshadowing it with its branches, there grew the hugest and most 
beautiful tree that Shasta had ever seen. Beyond the pool was a little low house of stone roofed with deep 
and ancient thatch. There was a sound of bleating and over at the far side of the enclosure there were 
some goats. The level ground was completely covered with the finest grass. 
"Are - are - are you," panted Shasta. "Are you King Lune of Archenland?" 
The old man shook his head. "No," he replied in a quiet voice, "I am the Hermit of the Southern March. 
And now, my son, waste no time on questions, but obey. This damsel is wounded. Your horses are spent. 
Rabadash is at this moment finding a ford over the Winding Arrow. If you run now, without a moment's 
rest, you will still be in time to warn King Lune." 
Shasta's heart fainted at these words for he felt he had no strength left. And he writhed inside at what 
seemed the cruelty and unfairness of the demand. He had not yet learned that if you do one good deed 
your reward usually is to be set to do another and harder and better one. But all he said out loud was: 
"Where is the King?" 
The Hermit turned and pointed with his staff. "Look," he said. "There is another gate, right opposite to 
the one you entered by. Open it and go straight ahead: always straight ahead, over level or steep, over 
smooth or rough, over dry or wet. I know by my art that you will find King Lune straight ahead. But run, 
run: always run." 
Shasta nodded his head, ran to the northern gate and disappeared beyond it. Then the Hermit took Aravis, 
whom he had all this time been supporting with his left arm, and half led, half carried her into the house. 
After a long time he came out again. 
"Now, cousins," he said to the Horses. "It is your turn." 

Without waiting for an answer - and indeed they were too exhausted to speak - he took the bridles and 
saddles off both of them. Then he rubbed them both down, so well that a groom in a King's stable could 
not have done it better. 
"There, cousins," he said, "dismiss it all from your minds and be comforted. Here is water and there is 
grass. You shall have a hot mash when I have milked my other cousins, the goats." 
"Sir," said Hwin, finding her voice at last, "will the Tarkheena live? Has the lion killed her?" 
"I who know many present things by my art," replied the Hermit with a smile, "have yet little knowledge 
of things future. Therefore I do not know whether any man or woman or beast in the whole world will be 
alive when the sun sets tonight. But be of good hope. The damsel is likely to live as long as any of her 
age." 
When Aravis came to herself she found that she was lying on her face on a low bed of extraordinary 
softness in a cool, bare room with walls of undressed stone. She couldn't understand why she had been 
laid on her face; but when she tried to turn and felt the hot, burning pains all over her back, she 
remembered, and realized why. She couldn't understand what delightfully springy stuff the bed was made 
of, because it was made of heather (which is the best bedding) and heather was a thing she had never seen 
or heard of. 
The door opened and the Hermit entered, carrying a large wooden bowl in his hand. After carefully 
setting this down, he came to the bedside, and asked: 
"How do you find yourself, my daughter?" 
"My back is very sore, father," said Aravis, "but there is nothing else wrong with me." 
He knelt beside her, laid his hand on her forehead, and felt her pulse. 
"There is no fever," he said. "You will do well. Indeed there is no reason why you should not get up 
tomorrow. But now, drink this." 

He fetched the wooden bowl and held it to her lips. Aravis couldn't help making a face when she tasted it, 
for goats' milk is rather a shock when you are not used to it. But she was very thirsty and managed to 
drink it all and felt better when she had finished. 
"Now, my daughter, you may sleep when you wish," said the Hermit. "For your wounds are washed and 
dressed and though they smart they are no more serious than if they had been the cuts of a whip. It must 
have been a very strange lion; for instead-of catching you out of the saddle and getting his teeth into you, 
he has only drawn his claws across your back. Ten scratches: sore, but not deep or dangerous." 
"I say!" said Aravis. "I have had luck." 
"Daughter," said the Hermit, "I have now lived a hundred and nine winters in this world and have never 
yet met any such thing as Luck. Them is something about all this that I do not understand: but if ever we 
need to know it, you may be sure that we shall." 
"And what about Rabadash and his two hundred horse?" asked Aravis. 
"They will not pass this way, I think," said the Hermit. "They must have found a ford by now well to the 
east of us. From there they will try to ride straight to Anvard." 
"Poor Shasta!" said Aravis. "Has he far to go? Will he get there first?" 
"There is good hope of it," said the old man. 
Aravis lay down again (on her side this time) and said, "Have I been asleep for a long time? It seems to 
be getting dark." 
The Hermit was looking out of the only window, which faced north. "This is not the darkness of night," 
he said presently. "The clouds are falling down from Stormness Head. Our foul weather always comes 

from there in these parts. There will be thick fog tonight." 
Next day, except for her sore back, Aravis felt so well that after breakfast (which was porridge and 
cream) the Hermit said she could get up. And of course she at once went out to speak to the Horses. The 
weather had changed and the whole of that green enclosure was filled, like a great green cup, with 
sunlight. It was a very peaceful place, lonely and quiet. 
Hwin at once trotted across to Aravis and gave her a horse-kiss. 
"But where's Bree?" said Aravis when each had asked after the other's health and sleep. 
"Over there," said Hwin, pointing with her nose to the far side of the circle. "And I wish you'd come and 
talk to him. There's something wrong, I can't get a word out of him." 
They strolled across and found Bree lying with his face towards the wall, and though he must have heard 
them coming, he never turned his head or spoke a word. 
"Good morning, Bree," said Aravis. "How are you this morning?" 
Bree muttered something that no one could hear. 
"The Hermit says that Shasta probably got to King Lune in time," continued Aravis, "so it looks as if all 
our troubles are over. Narnia, at last, Bree!" 
"I shall never see Narnia," said Bree in a low voice. 
"Aren't you well, Bree dear?" said Aravis. 

Bree turned round at last, his face mournful as only a horse's can be. 
"I shall go back to Calormen," he said. 
"What?" said Aravis. "Back to slavery!" 
"Yes," said Bree. "Slavery is all I'm fit for. How can I ever show my face among the free Horses of 
Narnia? - I who left a mare and a girl and a boy to be eaten by lions while I galloped all I could to save 
my own wretched skin!" 
"We all ran as hard as we could," said Hwin. 
"Shasta didn't!" snorted Bree. "At least he ran in the right direction: ran back. And that is what shames 
me most of all. I, who called myself a war-horse and boasted of a hundred fights, to be beaten by a little 
human boy - a child, a mere foal, who had never held a sword nor had any good nurture or example in his 
life!" 
"I know," said Aravis. "I felt just the same. Shasta was marvellous. I'm just as bad as you, Bree. I've been 
snubbing him and looking down on him ever since you met us and now he turns out to be the best of us 
all. But I think it would be better to stay and say we're sorry than to go back to Calormen." 
"It's all very well for you," said Bree. "You haven't disgraced yourself. But I've lost everything." 
"My good Horse," said the Hermit, who had approached them unnoticed because his bare feet made so 
little noise on that sweet, dewy grass. "My good Horse, you've lost nothing but your self-conceit. No, no, 
cousin. Don't put back your ears and shake your mane at me. If you are really so humbled as you sounded 
a minute ago, you must learn to listen to sense. You're not quite the great Horse you had come to think, 
from living among poor dumb horses. Of course you were braver and cleverer than them. You could 
hardly help being that. It doesn't follow that you'll be anyone very special in Narnia. But as long as you 
know you're nobody special, you'll be a very decent sort of Horse, on the whole, and taking one thing with 
another. And now, if you and my other four-footed cousin will come round to the kitchen door we'll see 
about the other half of that mash." 

WHEN Shasta went through the gate he found a slope of grass and a little heather running up before him 
to some trees. He had nothing to think about now and no plans to make: he had only to run, and that was 
quite enough. His limbs were shaking, a terrible stitch was beginning in his side, and the sweat that kept 
dropping into his eyes blinded them and made them smart. He was unsteady on his feet too, and more 
than once he nearly turned his ankle on a loose stone. 
The trees were thicker now than they had yet been and in the more open spaces there was bracken. The 
sun had gone in without making it any cooler. It had become one of those hot, grey days when there seem 
to be twice as many flies as usual. Shasta's face was covered with them; he didn't even try to shake them 
off - he had too much else to do. 
Suddenly he heard a horn - not a great throbbing horn like the horns of Tashbaan but a merry call, Ti-roto-
to-ho! Next moment he came out into a wide glade and found himself in a crowd of people. 
At least, it looked a crowd to him. In reality there were about fifteen or twenty of them, all gentlemen in 
green huntingdress, with their horses; some in the saddle and some standing by their horses' heads. In the 
centre someone was holding the stirrup for a man to mount. And the man he was holding it for was the 
jolliest, fat, applecheeked, twinkling eyed King you could imagine. 
As soon as Shasta came in sight this King forgot all about mounting his horse. He spread out his arms to 
Shasta, his face lit up, and he cried out in a great, deep voice that seemed to come from the bottom of his 
chest: 
"Corin! My son! And on foot, and in rags! What-" 
"No," panted Shasta, shaking his head. "Not Prince Corin. I - I - know I'm like him... saw his Highness in 

Tashbaan... sent his greetings." 
The King was staring at Shasta with an extraordinary expression on his face. 
"Are you K-King Lune?" gasped Shasta. And then, without waiting for an answer, "Lord King - fly - 
Anvard shut the gates - enemies upon you - Rabadash and two hundred horse." 
"Have you assurance of this, boy?" asked one of the other gentlemen. 
"My own eyes," said Shasta. "I've seen them. Raced them all the way from Tashbaan." 
"On foot?" said the gentleman, raising his eyebrows a little. 
Horses-with the Hermit," said Shasta. 
"Question him no more; Darrin," said King Lune. "I see truth in his face. We must ride for it, gentlemen. 
A spare horse there, for the boy. You can ride fast, friend?" 
For answer Shasta put his foot in the stirrup of the horse which had been led towards him and a moment 
later he was in the saddle. He had done it a hundred times with Bree in the last few weeks, and his 
mounting was very different now from what it had been on that first night when Bree had said that he 
climbed up a horse as if he were climbing a haystack. 
He was pleased to hear the Lord Darrin say to the King, "The boy has a true horseman's seat, Sire. I'll 
warrant there's noble blood in him." 
"His blood, aye, there's the point," said the King. And he stared hard at Shasta again with that curious 
expression, almost a hungry expression, in his steady, grey eyes. 

But by now -the whole party was moving off at a brisk canter. Shasta's seat was excellent but he was 
sadly puzzled what to do with his reins, for he had never touched the reins while he was on Bree's back. 
But he looked very carefully out of the corners of his eyes to see what the others were doing (as some of 
us have done at parties when we weren't quite sure which knife or fork we were meant to use) and tried to 
get his fingers right. But he didn't dare to try really directing the horse; he trusted it would follow the rest. 
The horse was of course an ordinary horse, not a Talking Horse; but it had quite wits enough to realize 
that the strange boy on its back had no whip and no spurs and was not really master of the situation. That 
was why Shasta soon found himself at the tail end of the procession. 
Even so, he was going pretty fast. There were no flies now and the air in his face was delicious. He had 
got his breath back too. And his errand had succeeded. For the first time since the arrival at Tashbaan 
(how long ago it seemed!) he was beginning to enjoy himself. 
He looked up to see how much nearer the mountain tops had come. To his disappointment he could not 
see them at all: only a vague greyness, rolling down towards them. He had never been in mountain 
country before and was surprised. "It's a cloud," he said to himself, "a cloud coming down. I see. Up here 
in the hills one is really in the sky. I shall see what the inside of a cloud is like. What fun! I've often 
wondered." Far away on his left and a little behind him, the sun was getting ready to set. 
They had come to a rough kind of road by now and were making very good speed. But Shasta's horse 
was still the last of the lot. Once or twice when the road made a bend (there was now continuous forest on 
each side of it) he lost sight of the others for a second or two. 
Then they plunged into the fog, or else the fog rolled over them. The world became grey. Shasta had not 
realized how cold and wet the inside of a cloud would be; nor how dark. The grey turned to black with 
alarming speed. 
Someone at the head of the column winded the horn every now and then, and each time the sound came 
from a little farther off. He couldn't see any of the others now, but of course he'd be able to as soon as he 
got round the next bend. But when he rounded it he still couldn't see them. In fact he could see nothing at 
all. His horse was walking now. "Get on, Horse, get on," said Shasta. Then came the horn, very faint. 
Bree had always told him that he must keep his heels well turned out, and Shasta had got the idea that 
something very terrible would happen if he dug his heels into a horse's sides. This seemed to him an 
occasion for trying it. "Look here, Horse," he said, "if you don't buck up, do you know what I'll do? I'll 
dig my heels into you. I really will." The horse, however, took no notice of this threat. So Shasta settled 
himself firmly in the saddle, gripped with his knees, clenched his teeth, and punched both the horse's sides 
with his heels as hard as he could. 

The only result was that the horse broke into a kind of pretence of a trot for five or six paces and then 
subsided into a walk again. And now it was quite dark and they seemed to have given up blowing that 
horn. The only sound was a steady drip-drip from the branches of the trees. 
"Well, I suppose even a walk will get us somewhere sometime," said Shasta to himself. "I only hope I 
shan't run into Rabadash and his people." 
He went on for what seemed a long time, always at a walking pace. He began to hate that horse, and he 
was also beginning to feel very hungry. 
Presently he came to a place where the road divided into two. He was just wondering which led to 
Anvard when he was startled by a noise from behind him. It was the noise of trotting horses. "Rabadash!" 
thought Shasta. He had no way of guessing which road Rabadash would take. "But if I take one," said 
Shasta to himself, "he may take the other: and if I stay at the cross-roads I'm sure to be caught." He 
dismounted and led his horse as quickly as he could along the right-hand road. 
The sound of the cavalry grew rapidly nearer and in a minute or two Shasta realized that they were at the 
crossroads. He held his breath, waiting to see which way they would take. 
There came a low word of command "Halt!" then a moment of horsey noises - nostrils blowing, hoofs 
pawing, bits being champed, necks being patted. Then a voice spoke. 
"Attend, all of you," it said. "We are now within a furlong of the castle. Remember your orders. Once we 
are in Narnia, as we should be by sunrise, you are to kill as little as possible. On this venture you are to 
regard every drop of Narnian blood as more precious than a gallon of your own. On this venture, I say. 
The gods will send us a happier hour and then you must leave nothing alive between Cair Paravel and the 
Western Waste. But we are not yet in Narnia. Here in Archenland it is another thing. In the assault on this 
castle of King Lune's, nothing matters but speed. Show your mettle. It must be mine within an hour. And 
if it is, I give it all to you. I reserve no booty for myself. Kill me every barbarian male within its walls, 
down to the child that was born yesterday, and everything else is yours to divide as you please - the 
women, the gold, the jewels, the weapons, and the wine. The man that I see hanging back when we come 
to the gates shall be burned alive. In the name of Tash the irresistible, the inexorable forward!" 
With a great cloppitty-clop the column began to move, and Shasta breathed again. They had taken the 
other road. 

Shasta thought they took a long time going past, for though he had been talking and thinking about "two 
hundred horse" all day, he had not realized how many they really were. But at last the sound died away 
and once more he was alone amid the drip-drip from the trees. 
He now knew the way to Anvard but of course he could not now go there: that would only mean running 
into the arms of Rabadash's troopers. "What on earth am I to do?" said Shasta to himself. But he 
remounted his horse and continued along the road he had chosen, in the faint hope of finding some 
cottage where he might ask for shelter and a meal. He had thought, of course, of going back to Aravis and 
Bree and Hwin at the hermitage, but he couldn't because by now he had not the least idea of the direction. 
"After all," said Shasta, "this road is bound to get to somewhere." 
But that all depends on what you mean by somewhere. The road kept on getting to somewhere in the 
sense that it got to more and more trees, all dark and dripping, and to colder and colder air. And strange, 
icy winds kept blowing the mist past him though they never blew it away. If he had been used to 
mountain country he would have realized that this meant he was now very high up - perhaps right at the 
top of the pass. But Shasta knew nothing about mountains. 
"I do think," said Shasta, "that I must be the most unfortunate boy that ever lived in the whole world. 
Everything goes right for everyone except me. Those Narnian lords and ladies got safe away from 
Tashbaan; I was left behind. Aravis and Bree and Hwin are all as snug as anything with that old Hermit: 
of course I was the one who was sent on. King Lune and his people must have got safely into the castle 
and shut the gates long before Rabadash arrived, but I get left out." 
And being very tired and having nothing inside him, he felt so sorry for himself that the tears rolled down 
his cheeks. 
What put a stop to all this was a sudden fright. Shasta discovered that someone or somebody was walking 
beside him. It was pitch dark and he could see nothing. And the Thing (or Person) was going so quietly 
that he could hardly hear any footfalls. What he could hear was breathing. His invisible companion 
seemed to breathe on a very large scale, and Shasta got the impression that it was a very large creature. 
And he had come to notice this breathing so gradually that he had really no idea how long it had been 
there. It was a horrible shock. 

It darted into his mind that he had heard long ago that there were giants in these Northern countries. He 
bit his lip in terror. But now that he really had something to cry about, he stopped crying. 
The Thing (unless it was a Person) went on beside him so very quietly that Shasta began to hope he had 
only imagined it. But just as he was becoming quite sure of it, there suddenly came a deep, rich sigh out 
of the darkness beside him. That couldn't be imagination! Anyway, he had felt the hot breath of that sigh 
on his chilly left hand. 
If the horse had been any good - or if he had known how to get any good out of the horse - he would have 
risked everything on a breakaway and a wild gallop. But he knew he couldn't make that horse gallop. So 
he went on at a walking pace and the unseen companion walked and breathed beside him. At last he could 
bear it no longer. 
"Who are you?" he said, scarcely above a whisper. 
"One who has waited long for you to speak," said the Thing. Its voice was not loud, but very large and 
deep. 
"Are you- are you a giant?" asked Shasta. 
"You might call me a giant," said the Large Voice. "But I am not like the creatures you call giants." 
"I can't see you at all," said Shasta, after staring very hard. Then (for an even more terrible idea had come 
into his head) he said, almost in a scream, "You're not - not something dead, are you? Oh please - please 
do go away. What harm have I ever done you? Oh, I am the unluckiest person in the whole world!" 
Once more he felt the warm breath of the Thing on his hand and face. "There," it said, "that is not the 
breath of a ghost. Tell me your sorrows." 
Shasta was a little reassured by the breath: so he told how he had never known his real father or mother 
and had been brought up sternly by the fisherman. And then he told the story of his escape and how they 

were chased by lions and forced to swim for their lives; and of all their dangers in Tashbaan and about his 
night among the tombs and how the beasts howled at him out of the desert. And he told about the heat and 
thirst of their desert journey and how they were almost at their goal when another lion chased them and 
wounded Aravis. And also, how very long it was since he had had anything to eat. 
"I do not call you unfortunate," said the Large Voice. 
"Don't you think it was bad luck to meet so many lions?" said Shasta. 
"There was only one lion," said the Voice. 
"What on earth do you mean? I've just told you there were at least two the first night, and-" 
"There was only one: but he was swift of foot." 
"How do you know?" 
"I was the lion." And as Shasta gaped with open mouth and said nothing, the Voice continued. "I was the 
lion who forced you to join with Aravis. I was the cat who comforted you among the houses of the dead. I 
was the lion who drove the jackals from you while you slept. I was the lion who gave the Horses the new 
strength of fear for the last mile so that you should reach King Lune in time. And I was the lion you do 
not remember who pushed the boat in which you lay, a child near death, so that it came to shore where a 
man sat, wakeful at midnight, to receive you." 
"Then it was you who wounded Aravis?" 
"It was I" 
"But what for?" 

"Child," said the Voice, "I am telling you your story, not hers. I tell no one any story but his own." 
"Who are you?" asked Shasta. 
"Myself," said the Voice, very deep and low so that the earth shook: and again "Myself", loud and clear 
and gay: and then the third time "Myself", whispered so softly you could hardly hear it, and yet it seemed 
to come from all round you as if the leaves rustled with it. 
Shasta was no longer afraid that the Voice belonged to something that would eat him, nor that it was the 
voice of a ghost. But a new and different sort of trembling came over him. Yet he felt glad too. 
The mist was turning from black to grey and from grey to white. This must have begun to happen some 
time ago, but while he had been talking to the Thing he had not been noticing anything else. Now, the 
whiteness around him became a shining whiteness; his eyes began to blink. Somewhere ahead he could 
hear birds singing. He knew the night was over at last. He could see the mane and ears and head of his 
horse quite easily now. A golden light fell on them from the left. He thought it was the sun. 
He turned and saw, pacing beside him, taller than the horse, a Lion. The horse did not seem to be afraid 
of it or else could not see it. It was from the Lion that the light came. No one ever saw anything more 
terrible or beautiful. 
Luckily Shasta had lived all his life too far south in Calormen to have heard the tales that were whispered 
in Tashbaan about a dreadful Narnian demon that appeared in the form of a lion. And of course he knew 
none of the true stories about Aslan, the great Lion, the son of the Emperor-over-the-sea, the King above 
all High Kings in Narnia. But after one glance at the Lion's face he slipped out of the saddle and fell at its 
feet. He couldn't say anything but then he didn't want to say anything, and he knew he needn't say 
anything. 
The High King above all kings stooped towards him. Its mane, and some strange and solemn perfume 
that hung about the mane, was all round him. It touched his forehead with its tongue. He lifted his face 
and their eyes met. Then instantly the pale brightness of the mist and the fiery brightness of the Lion 
rolled themselves together into a swirling glory and gathered themselves up and disappeared. He was 
alone with the horse on a grassy hillside under a blue sky. And there were birds singing. 

"WAS it all a dream?" wondered Shasta. But it couldn't have been a dream for there in the grass before 
him he saw the deep, large print of the Lion's front right paw. It took one's breath away to think of the 
weight that could make a footprint like that. But there was something more remarkable than the size about 
it. As he looked at it, water had already filled the bottom of it. Soon it was full to the brim, and then 
overflowing, and a little stream was running downhill, past him, over the grass. 
Shasta stooped and drank - a very long drink - and then dipped his face in and splashed his head. It was 
extremely cold, and clear as glass, and refreshed him very much. After that he stood up, shaking the water 
out of his ears and flinging the wet hair back from his forehead, and began to take stock of his 
surroundings. 
Apparently it was still very early morning. The sun had only just risen, and it had risen out of the forests 
which he saw low down and far away on his right. The country j which he was looking at was absolutely 
new to him. It was t a green valley-land dotted with trees through which he caught the gleam of a river 
that wound away roughly to the North-West. On the far side of the valley there were high and even rocky 
hills, but they were lower than the mountains he had seen yesterday. Then he began to guess where he 
was. He turned and looked behind him and saw that the slope on which he was standing belonged to a 
range of far higher mountains. 
"I see," said Shasta to himself. "Those are the big mountains between Archenland and Narnia. I was on 
the°. other side of them yesterday. I must have come through the pass in the night. What luck that I hit it! 
- at least it wasn't luck at all really, it was Him. And now I'm in Narnia." 
He turned and unsaddled his horse and took off its bridle - "Though you are a perfectly horrid horse," he 
said. It took no notice of this remark and immediately began eating grass. That horse had a very low 
opinion of Shasta. 

"I wish I could eat grass!" thought Shasta. "It's no good going back to Anvard, it'll all be besieged. I'd 
better get lower down into the valley and see if I can get anything to eat." 
So he went on downhill (the thick dew was cruelly cold to his bare feet) till he came into a wood. There 
was a kind of track running through it and he had not followed this for many minutes when he heard a 
thick and rather wheezy voice saying to him. 
"Good morning, neighbour." 
Shasta looked round eagerly to find the speaker and presently saw a small, prickly person with a dark 
face who had just come out from among the trees. At least, it was small for a person but very big indeed 
for a hedgehog, which was what it was. 
"Good morning," said Shasta. "But I'm not a neighbour. In fact I'm a stranger in these parts." 
"Ah?" said the Hedgehog inquiringly. 
"I've come over the mountains - from Archenland, you know." 
"Ha, Archenland," said the Hedgehog. "That's a terrible long way. Never been there myself." 
"And I think, perhaps," said Shasta, "someone ought to be told that there's an army of savage Calormenes 
attacking Anvard at this very moment." 
"You don't say so!" answered the Hedgehog. "Well, think of that. And they do say that Calormen is 
hundreds and thousands of miles away, right at the world's end, across a great sea of sand." 
"It's not nearly as far as you think," said Shasta. "And oughtn't something to be done about this attack on 
Anvard? Oughtn't your High King to be told?" 

"Certain sure, something ought to be done about it," said the Hedgehog. "But you see I'm just on my way 
to bed for a good day's sleep. Hullo, neighbour!" 
The last words were addressed to an immense biscuitcoloured rabbit whose head had just popped up from 
somewhere beside the path. The Hedgehog immediately told the Rabbit what it had just learned from 
Shasta. The Rabbit agreed that this was very remarkable news and that somebody ought to tell someone 
about it with a view to doing something. 
And so it went on. Every few minutes they were joined by other creatures, some from the branches 
overhead and some from little underground houses at their feet, till the party consisted of five rabbits, a 
squirrel, two magpies, a goat-foot faun, and a mouse, who all talked at the same time and all agreed with 
the Hedgehog. For the truth was that in that golden age when the Witch and the Winter had gone and 
Peter the High King ruled at Cair Paravel, the smaller woodland people of Narnia were so safe and happy 
that they were getting a little careless. 
Presently, however, two more practical people arrived in the little wood. One was a Red Dwarf whose 
name appeared to be Duffle. The other was a stag, a beautiful lordly creature with wide liquid eyes, 
dappled flanks and legs so thin and graceful that they looked as if you could break them with two fingers. 
"Lion alive!" roared the Dwarf as soon as he had heard the news. "And if that's so, why are we all 
standing still, chattering? Enemies at Anvard! News must be sent to Cair Paravel at once. The army must 
be called out. Narnia must go to the aid of King Lune." 
"Ah!" said the Hedgehog. "But you won't find the High King at the Cair. He's away to the North 
trouncing those giants. And talking of giants, neighbours, that puts me in mind -" 
"Who'll take our message?" interrupted the Dwarf. "Anyone here got more speed than me?" 
"I've got speed," said the Stag. "What's my message? How many Calormenes?" 
"Two hundred: under Prince Rabadash. And -" But the Stag was already away - all four legs off the 
ground at once, and in a moment its white stern had disappeared among the remoter trees. 

"Wonder where he's going," said a Rabbit. "He won't find the High King at Cair Paravel, you know." 
"He'll find Queen Lucy," said Duffle. "And then hullo! What's wrong with the Human? It looks pretty 
green. Why, I do believe it's quite faint. Perhaps it's mortal hungry. When did you last have a meal, 
youngster?" 
"Yesterday morning," said Shasta weakly. 
"Come on, then, come on," said the Dwarf, at once throwing his thick little arms round Shasta's waist to 
support him. "Why, neighbours, we ought all to be ashamed of ourselves! You come with me, lad. 
Breakfast! Better than talking." 
With a great deal' of bustle, muttering reproaches to itself, the Dwarf half led and half supported Shasta at 
a great speed further into the wood and a little downhill. It was a longer walk than Shasta wanted at that 
moment and his legs had begun to feel very shaky before they came out from the trees on to bare hillside. 
There they found a little house with a smoking chimney and an open door, and as they came to the 
doorway Duffle called out, 
"Hey, brothers! A visitor for breakfast." 
And immediately, mixed with a sizzling sound, there came to Shasta a simply delightful smell. It was one 
he had never smelled in his life before, but I hope you have. It was, in fact, the smell of bacon and eggs 
and mushrooms all frying in a pan. 
"Mind your head, lad," said Duffle a moment too late, for Shasta had already bashed his forehead against 
the low lintel of the door. "Now," continued the Dwarf, "sit you down. The table's a bit low for you, but 
then the stool's low too. That's right. And here's porridge - and here's a jug of cream - and here's a spoon." 
By the time Shasta had finished his porridge, the Dwarf's two brothers (whose names were Rogin and 
Bricklethumb) were putting the dish of bacon and eggs and mushrooms, and the coffee pot and the hot 
milk, and the toast, on the table. 

It was all new and wonderful to Shasta for Calormene food is quite different. He didn't even know what 
the slices of brown stuff were, for he had never seen toast before. He didn't know what the yellow soft 
thing they smeared on the toast was, because in Calormen you nearly always get oil instead of butter. And 
the house itself was quite different from the dark, frowsty, fish-smelling but of Arsheesh and from the 
pillared and carpeted halls in the palaces of Tashbaan. The roof was very low, and everything was made 
of wood, and there was a cuckoo-clock and a red-and-white checked table-cloth and a bowl of wild 
flowers and little curtains on the thick-paned windows. It was also rather troublesome having to use dwarf 
cups and plates and knives and forks. This meant that helpings were very small, but then there were a 
great many helpings, so that Shasta's plate or cup was being filled every moment, and every moment the 
Dwarfs themselves were saying, "Butter please", or "Another cup of coffee," or "I'd like a few more 
mushrooms," or "What about frying another egg or so?" And when at last they had all eaten as much as 
they possibly could the three Dwarfs drew lots for who would do the washing-up, and Rogin was the 
unlucky one. Then Duffle and Bricklethumb took Shasta outside to a bench which ran against the cottage 
wall, and they all stretched out their legs and gave a great sigh of contentment and the two Dwarfs lit their 
pipes. The dew was off the grass now and the sun was warm; indeed, if there hadn't been a light breeze, it 
would have been too hot. 
"Now, Stranger," said Duffle, "I'll show you the lie of the land. You can see nearly all South Narnia from 
here, and we're rather proud of the view. Right away on your left, beyond those near hills, you can just see 
the Western Mountains. And that round hill away on your right is called the Hill of the Stone Table. Just 
beyond -" 
But at that moment he was interrupted by a snore from Shasta who, what with his night's journey and his 
excellent breakfast, had gone fast asleep. The kindly Dwarfs, as soon as they noticed this, began making 
signs to each other not to wake him, and indeed did so much whispering and nodding and getting up and - 
tiptoeing away that they certainly would have waked him if he had been less tired. 
He slept pretty well -nearly all day but woke up in time for supper. The beds in that house were all too 
small for him but they made him a fine bed of heather on the floor, and he never stirred nor dreamed all 
night. Next morning they had just finished breakfast when they heard a shrill, exciting sound from 
outside. 
"Trumpets!" said all the Dwarfs, as they and Shasta all came running out. 
The trumpets sounded again: a new noise to Shasta, not huge and solemn like the horns of Tashbaan nor 
gay and merry like King Lune's hunting horn, but clear and sharp and valiant. The noise was coming from 
the woods to the East, and soon there was a noise of horse-hoofs mixed with it. A moment later the head 

of the column came into sight. 
First came the Lord Peridan on a bay horse carrying the great banner of Narnia - a red lion on a green 
ground. Shasta knew him at once. Then came three people riding abreast, two on great chargers and one 
on a pony. The two on the chargers were King Edmund and a fair-haired lady with a very merry face who 
wore a helmet and a mail shirt and carried a bow across her shoulder and a quiver full of arrows at her 
side. ("The Queen Lucy," whispered Duffle.) But the one on the pony was Corin. After that came the 
main body of the army: men on ordinary horses, men on Talking Horses (who didn't mind being ridden on 
proper occasions, as when Narnia went to war), centaurs, stern, hard-bitten bears, great Talking Dogs, and 
last of all six giants. For there are good giants in Narnia. But though he knew they were on the right side 
Shasta at first could hardly bear to look at them; there are some things that take a lot of getting used to. 
Just as the King and Queen reached the cottage and the Dwarfs began making low bows to them, King 
Edmund called out, 
"Now, friends! Time for a halt and a morsel!" and at once there was a great bustle of people dismounting 
and haversacks being opened and conversation beginning when Corm came running up to Shasta and 
seized both his hands and cried, 
"What! You here! So you got through all right? I am glad. Now we shall have some sport. And isn't it 
luck! We only got into harbour at Cair Paravel yesterday morning and the very first person who met us 
was Chervy the Stag with all this news of an attack on Anvard. Don't you think -" 
"Who is your Highness's friend?" said King Edmund who had just got off his horse. 
"Don't you see, Sire?" said Corin. "It's my double: the boy you mistook me for at Tashbaan." 
"Why, so he is your double," exclaimed Queen Lucy. "As like as two twins. This is a marvellous thing." 
"Please, your Majesty," said Shasta to King Edmund, "I was no traitor, really I wasn't. And I couldn't 
help hearing your plans. But I'd never have dreamed of telling them to your enemies." 

"I know now that you were no traitor, boy," said King Edmund, laying his hand on Shasta's head. "But if 
you would not be taken for one, another time try not to hear what's meant for other ears. But all's well." 
After that there was so much bustle and talk and coming and going that Shasta for a few minutes lost 
sight of Corin and Edmund and Lucy. But Corin was the sort of boy whom one is sure to hear of pretty 
soon and it wasn't very long before Shasta heard King Edmund saying in a loud voice: 
"By the Lion's Mane, prince, this is too much! Will your Highness never be better? You are more of a 
heart's-scald than our whole army together! I'd as lief have a regiment of hornets in my command as you." 
Shasta wormed his way through the crowd and there saw Edmund, looking very angry indeed, Corin 
looking a little ashamed of himself, and a strange Dwarf sitting on the ground making faces. A couple of 
fauns had apparently just been helping it out of its armour. 
"If I had but my cordial with me," Queen Lucy was saying, "I could soon mend this. But the High King 
has so strictly charged me not to carry it commonly to the wars and to keep it only for great extremities!" 
What had happened was this. As soon as Corin had spoken to Shasta, Corin's elbow had been plucked by 
a Dwarf in the army called Thornbut. 
"What is it, Thornbut?" Corin had said. 
"Your Royal Highness," said Thornbut, drawing him aside, "our march today will bring us through the 
pass and right to your royal father's castle. We may be in battle before night." 
"I know," said Corin. "Isn't it splendid!" 
"Splendid or not," said Thornbut, "I have the strictest orders from King Edmund to see to it that your 
Highness is not in the fight. You will be allowed to see it, and that's treat enough for your Highness's little 
years." 

"Oh what nonsense!" Corin burst out. "Of course I'm going to fight. Why, the Queen Lucy's going to be 
with the archers." 
"The Queen's grace will do as she pleases," said Thornbut. "But you are in my charge. Either I must have 
your solemn and princely word that you'll keep your pony beside mine - not half a neck ahead - till I give 
your Highness leave to depart: or else - it is his Majesty's word - we must go with our wrists tied together 
like two prisoners." 
"I'll knock you down if you try to bind me," said Corm. 
"I'd like to see your Highness do it," said the Dwarf. 
That was quite enough for a boy like Corin and in a second he and the Dwarf were at it hammer and 
tongs. It would have been an even match for, though Corin had longer arms and more height, the Dwarf 
was older and tougher. But it was never fought out (that's the worst of fights on a rough hillside) for by 
very bad luck Thornbut trod on a loose stone, came flat down on his nose, and found when he tried to get 
up that he had sprained his ankle: a real excruciating sprain which would keep him from walking or riding 
for at least a fortnight. 
"See what your Highness has done," said King Edmund. "Deprived us of a proved warrior on the very 
edge of battle." 
"I'll take his place, Sire," said Corin. 
"Pshaw," said Edmund. "No one doubts your courage. But a boy in battle is a danger only to his own 
side." 
At that moment the King was called away to attend to something else, and Corin, after apologizing 
handsomely to the Dwarf, rushed up to Shasta and whispered, 
"Quick. There's a spare pony now, and the Dwarf's armour. Put it on before anyone notices." 

"What for?" said Shasta. 
"Why, so that you and I can fight in the battle of course! Don't you want to?" 
"Oh - ah, yes, of course," said Shasta. But he hadn't been thinking of doing so at all, and began to get a 
most uncomfortable prickly feeling in his spine. 
"That's right," said Corin. "Over your head. Now the sword-belt. But we must ride near the tail of the 
column and keep as quiet as mice. Once the battle begins everyone will be far too busy to notice us." 
By about eleven o'clock the whole company was once more on the march, riding westward with the 
mountains on their left. Corin and Shasta rode right at the rear with the Giants immediately in front of 
them. Lucy and Edmund and Peridan were busy with their plans for the battle and though Lucy once said, 
"But where is his goosecap Highness?" Edmund only replied, "Not in the front, and that's good news 
enough. Leave well alone." 
Shasta told Corin most of his adventures and explained that he had learned all his riding from a horse and 
didn't really know how to use the reins. Corin instructed him in this, besides telling him all about their 
secret sailing from Tashbaan. 
"And where is the Queen Susan?" 

"At Cair Paravel," said Corin. "She's not like Lucy, you know, who's as good as a man, or at any rate as 
good as a boy. Queen Susan is more like an ordinary grown-up lady. She doesn't ride to the wars, though 
she is an excellent archer." 
The hillside path which they were following became narrower all the time and the drop on their right 
hand became steeper. At last they were going in single file along the edge of a precipice and Shasta 
shuddered to think that he had done the same last night without knowing it. "But of course," he thought, "I 
was quite safe. That is why the Lion kept on my left. He was between me and the edge all the time." 
Then the path went left and south away from the cliff and there were thick woods on both sides of it and 
they went steeply up and up into the pass. There would have been a splendid view from the top if it were 
open ground but among all those trees you could see nothing - only, every now and then, some huge 
pinnacle of rock above the tree-tops, and an eagle or two wheeling high up in the blue air. 
"They smell battle," said Corin, pointing at the birds. "They know we're preparing a feed for them." 
Shasta didn't like this at all. 
When they had crossed the neck of the pass and come a good deal lower they reached more open ground 
and from here Shasta could see all Archenland, blue and hazy, spread out below him and even (he 
thought) a hint of the desert beyond it. But the sun, which had perhaps two hours or so to go before it set, 
was in his eyes and he couldn't make things out distinctly. 
Here the army halted and spread out in a line, and there was a great deal of rearranging. A whole 
detachment of very dangerous-looking Talking Beasts whom Shasta had not noticed before and who were 
mostly of the cat kind (leopards, panthers, and the like) went padding and growling to take up their 
positions on the left. The giants were ordered to the right, and before going there they all took off 
something they had been carrying on their backs and sat down for a moment. Then Shasta saw that what 
they had been carrying and were now putting on were pairs of boots: horrid, heavy, spiked boots which 
came up to their knees. Then they sloped their huge clubs over their shoulders and marched to their battle 
position. The archers, with Queen Lucy, fell to the rear and you could first see them bending their bows 
and then hear the twangtwang as they tested the strings. And wherever you looked you could see people 
tightening girths, putting on helmets, drawing swords, and throwing cloaks to the ground. There was 
hardly any talking now. It was very solemn and very dreadful. "I'm in for it now - I really am in for it 
now," thought Shasta. Then there came noises far ahead: the sound of many men shouting and a steady 
thud-thud-thud 

"Battering ram," whispered Corin. "They're battering the gate." 
Even Corin looked quite serious now. 
"Why doesn't King Edmund get on?" he said. "I can' stand this waiting about. Chilly too." 
Shasta nodded: hoping he didn't look as frightened as felt. 
The trumpet at last! On the move now - now trotting the banner streaming out in the wind. They had 
topped low ridge now, and below them the whole scene sudden opened out; a little, many-towered castle 
with its gate towards them. No moat, unfortunately, but of course the gate shut and the portcullis down. 
On the walls they could see, like little white dots, the faces of the defenders. Down below, about fifty of 
the Calormenes, dismounted, were steadily swinging a great tree trunk against the gate. But at once the 
scene changed. The main bulk of Rabadash's men had been on foot ready to assault the gate. But now he 
had seen the Narnians sweeping down from the ridge. There is no doubt those Calormenes are 
wonderfully trained. It seemed to Shasta only a second before a whole line of the enemy were on 
horseback again, wheeling round to meet them, swinging towards them. 
And now a gallop. The ground between the two armies grew less every moment. Faster, faster. All 
swords out now, all shields up to the nose, all prayers said, all teeth clenched. Shasta was dreadfully 
frightened. But it suddenly came into his head, "If you funk this, you'll funk every battle all your life. 
Now or never." 
But when at last the two lines met he had really very littler idea of what happened. There was a frightful 
confusion`; and an appalling noise. His sword was knocked clean out of his hand pretty soon. And he'd 
got the reins tangled somehow. Then he found himself slipping. Then a spear came straight at him and as 
he ducked to avoid it he rolled right off his horse, bashed his left knuckles terribly against someone else's 
armour, and then - But it is no use trying to describe the battle from Shasta's point of view; he understood 
too little of the fight in general and even of his own part in it. The best way I can tell you what really 
happened is to take you some miles away to where the Hermit of the Southern March sat gazing into the 
smooth pool beneath the spreading tree, with Bree and Hwin and Aravis beside him. 
For it was in this pool that the Hermit looked when he wanted to know what was going on in the world 
outside the green walls of his hermitage. There, as in a mirror, he could see, at certain times, what was 
going on in the streets of cities far farther south than Tashbaan, or what ships were putting into Redhaven 

in the remote Seven Isles, or what robbers or wild beasts stirred in the great Western forests between 
Lantern Waste and Telmar. And all this day he had hardly left his pool, even to eat or drink, for he knew 
that great events were on foot in Archenland. Aravis and the Horses gazed into it too. They could see it 
was a magic pool: instead of reflecting the tree and the sky it revealed cloudy and coloured shapes 
moving, always moving, in its depths. But they could see nothing clearly. The Hermit could and from 
time to time he told them what he saw. A little while before Shasta rode into his first battle, the Hermit 
had begun speaking like this: 
"I see one - two - three eagles wheeling in the gap by Stormness Head. One is the oldest of all the eagles. 
He would not be out unless battle was at hand. I see him wheel to and fro, peering down sometimes at 
Anvard and sometimes to the east, behind Stormness. Ah - I see now what Rabadash and his men have 
been so busy at all day. They have felled and lopped a great tree and they are now coming out of the 
woods carrying it as a ram. They have learned something from the failure of last night's assult. He would 
have been wiser if he had set his men to making ladders: but it takes too long and he is impatient. Fool 
that he is! He ought to have ridden back to Tashbaan as soon as the first attack failed, for his whole plan 
depended on speed and surprise. Now they are bringing their ram into position. King Lune's men are 
shooting hard from the walls. Five Calormenes have fallen: but not many will. They have their shields 
above their heads. Rabadash is giving his orders now. With him are his most trusted lords, fierce Tarkaans 
from the eastern provinces. I can see their faces. There is Corradin of Castle Tormunt, and Azrooh, and 
Chlamash, and Ilgamuth of the twisted lip, and a tall Tarkaan with a crimson beard -" 
"By the Mane, my old master Anradin!" said Bree. 
"S-s-sly" said Aravis. 
"Now the ram has started. If I could hear as well as see, what a noise that would make! Stroke after 
stroke: and no gate can stand it for ever. But wait! Something up by Stormness has scared the birds. 
They're coming out in masses. And wait again . . . I can't see yet . . . ah! Now I can. The whole ridge, up 
on the east, is black with horsemen. If only the wind would catch that standard and spread it out. They're 
over the ridge now, whoever they are. Aha! I've seen the banner now. Narnia, Narnia! It's the red lion. 
They're in full career down the hill now. I can see King Edmund. There's a woman behind among the 
archers. Oh! -" 
"What is it?" asked Hwin breathlessly. 
"All his Cats are dashing out from the left of the line." 

"Cats?" said Aravis. 
"Great cats, leopards and such," said the Hermit impatiently. "I see, I see. The Cats are coming round in a 
circle to get at the horses of the dismounted men. A good stroke. The Calormene horses are mad with 
terror already. Now the Cats are in among them. But Rabadash has reformed his line and has a hundred 
men in the saddle. They're riding to meet the Narnians. There's only a hundred yards between the two 
lines now. Only fifty. I can see King Edmund, I can see the Lord Peridan. There are two mere children in 
the Narnian line. What can the King be about to let them into battle? Only ten yards - the lines have met. 
The Giants on the Narnian right are doing wonders . . . but one's down . . . shot through the eye, I suppose. 
The centre's all in a muddle. I can see more on the left. There are the two boys again. Lion alive! one is 
Prince Corm. The other, like him as two peas. It's your little Shasta. Corm is fighting like a man. He's 
killed a Calormene. I 'can see a bit of the centre now. Rabadash and Edmund almost met then, but the 
press has separated them -" 
"What about Shasta?" said Aravis. 
"Oh the fool!" groaned the Hermit. "Poor, brave little fool. He knows nothing about this work. He's 
making no use at all of his shield. His whole side's exposed. He hasn't the faintest idea what to do with his 
sword. Oh, he's remembered it now. He's waving it wildly about . . . nearly cut his own pony's head off, 
and he will in a moment if he's not careful. It's been knocked out of his hand now. It's mere murder 
sending a child into the battle; he can't live five minutes. Duck you fool - oh, he's down." 
"Killed?" asked three voices breathlessly. 
"How can I tell?" said the Hermit. "The Cats have done their work. All the riderless horses are dead or 
escaped now: no retreat for the Calormenes on them. Now the Cats are turning back into the main battle. 
They're leaping on the rams-men. The ram is down. Oh, good! good! The gates are opening from the 
inside: there's going to be a sortie. The first three are out. It's King Lune in the middle: the brothers Dar 
and Darrin on each side of him. Behind them are Tran and Shar and Cole with his brother Colin. There are 
ten - twenty - nearly thirty of them out by now. The Calormen line is being forced back upon them. King 
Edmund is dealing marvellous strokes. He's just slashed Corradin's head off. Lots of Calormenes have 
thrown down their arms and are running for the woods. Those that remain are hard pressed. The Giants 
are closing in on the right - Cats on the left - King Lune from their rear. The Calormenes are a little knot 
now, fighting back to back. Your Tarkaan's down, Bree. Lune and Azrooh are fighting hand to hand; the 
King looks like winning - the King is keeping it up well - the King has won. Azrooh's down. King 
Edmund's down - no, he's up again: he's at it with Rabadash. They're fighting in the very gate of the 
castle. Several Calormenes have surrendered. Darrin has killed Ilgamuth. I can't see what's happened to 
Rabadash. I think he's dead, leaning against the castle wall, but I don't know. Chlamash and King Edmund 
are still fighting but the battle is over everywhere else. Chlamash has surrendered. The battle is over. The 

Calormenes are utterly defeated." 
When Shasta fell off his horse he gave himself up for lost. But horses, even in battle, tread on human 
beings very much less than you would suppose. After a very horrible ten minutes or so Shasta realized 
suddenly that there were no longer any horses stamping about in the immediate neighbourhood and that 
the noise (for there were still a good many noises going on) was no longer that of a battle. He sat up and 
stared about him. Even he, little as he knew of battles, could soon see that the Archenlanders and 
Narnians had won. The only living Calormenes he could see were prisoners, the castle gates were wide 
open, and King Lune and King Edmund were shaking hands across the battering ram. From the circle of 
lords and warriors around them there arose a sound of breathless and excited, but obviously cheerful 
conversation. And then, suddenly, it all united and swelled into a great roar of laughter. 
Shasta. picked himself up, feeling uncommonly stiff, and ran towards the sound to see what the joke was. 
A very curious sight met his eyes. The unfortunate Rabadash appeared to be suspended from the castle 
walls. His feet, which were about two feet from the ground, were kicking wildly. His chain-shirt was 
somehow hitched up so that it was horribly tight under the arms and came half way over his face. In fact 
he looked just as a man looks if you catch him in the very act of getting into a stiff shirt that is a little too 
small for him. As far as could be made out afterwards (and you may be sure the story was well talked over 
for many a day) what happened was something like this. Early in the battle one of the Giants had made an 
unsuccessful stamp at Rabadash with his spiked boot: unsuccessful because it didn't crush Rabadash, 
which was what the Giant had intended, but not quite useless because one of the spikes tore the chain 
mail, just as you or I might tear an ordinary shirt. So Rabadash, by the time he encountered Edmund at the 
gate, had a hole in the back of his hauberk. And when Edmund pressed him back nearer and nearer to the 
wall, he jumped up on a mounting block and stood there raining down blows on Edmund from above. But 
then, finding that this position, by raising him above the heads of everyone else, made him a mark for 
every arrow from the Narnian bows, he decided to jump down again. And he meant to look and sound - 
no doubt for a moment he did look and sound - very grand and very dreadful as he jumped, crying, "The 
bolt of Tash falls from above." But he had to jump sideways because the crowd in front of him left him no 
landing place in that direction. And then, in the neatest way you could wish, the tear in the back of his 
hauberk caught on a hook in the wall. (Ages ago this hook had had a ring in it for tying horses to.) And 
there he found himself, like a piece of washing hung up to dry, with everyone laughing at him. 
"Let me down, Edmund," howled Rabadash. "Let me down and fight me like a king and a man; or if you 
are too great a coward to do that, kill me at once." 
"Certainly," began King Edmund, but King Lune interrupted. 
"By your Majesty's good leave," said King Lune to Edmund. "Not so." Then turning to Rabadash he said, 
"Your royal Highness, if you had given that challenge a week ago, I'll answer for it there was no one in 
King Edmund's dominion, from the High King down to the smallest Talking Mouse, who would have 

refused it. But by attacking our castle of Anvard in time of peace without defiance sent, you have proved 
yourself no knight, but a traitor, and one rather to be whipped by the hangman than to be suffered to cross 
swords with any person of honour. Take him down, bind him, and carry him within till our pleasure is 
further known." 
Strong hands wrenched Rabadash's sword from him and he was carried away into the castle, shouting, 
threatening, cursing, and even crying. For though he could have faced torture he couldn't bear being made 
ridiculous. In Tashbaan everyone had always taken him seriously. 
At that moment Corin ran up to Shasta, seized his hand and started dragging him towards King Lune. 
"Here he is, Father, here he is," cried Corin. 
"Aye, and here thou art, at last," said the King in a very gruff voice. "And bast been in the battle, clean 
contrary to your obedience. A boy to break a father's heart! At your age a rod to your breech were fitter 
than a sword in your fist, ha!" But everyone, including Corin, could see that the King was very proud of 
him. 
"Chide him no more, Sire, if it please you," said Lord Darrin. "His Highness would not be your son if he 
did not inherit your conditions. It would grieve your Majesty more if he had to be reproved for the 
opposite fault." 
"Well, well," grumbled the King. "We'll pass it over for this time. And now -" ' 
What came next surprised Shasta as much as anything that had ever happened to him in his life. He found 
himself suddenly embraced inn bear-like hug by King Lune and kissed on both cheeks. Then the King set 
him down again and said, "Stand here together, boys, and let all the court see you. Hold up your heads. 
Now, gentlemen, look on them both. Has any man any doubts?" 
And still Shasta could not understand why everyone stared at him and at Corin nor what all the cheering 
was about. 

WE must now return to Aravis and the Horses. The Hermit, watching his pool, was able to tell them that 
Shasta was not killed or even seriously wounded, for he saw him get up and saw how affectionately he 
was greeted by King Lune. But as he could only see, not hear, he did not know what anyone was saying 
and, once the fighting had stopped and the talking had begun, it was not worth while looking in the pool 
any longer. 
Next morning, while the Hermit was indoors, the three of them discussed what they should do next. 
"I've had enough of this," said Hwin. "The Hermit has been very good to us and I'm very much obliged to 
him I'm sure. But I'm getting as fat as a pet pony, eating all day and getting no exercise. Let's go on to 
Narnia." 
"Oh not today, Ma'am," said Bree. "I wouldn't hurry things. Some other day, don't you think?" 
"We must see Shasta first and say good-bye to him - and - and apologize," said Aravis. 
"Exactly!" said Bree with great enthusiasm. "Just what I was going to say." 
"Oh, of course," said Hwin. "I expect he is in Anvard. Naturally we'd look in on him and say good-bye. 
But that's on our way. And why shouldn't we start at once? After all, I thought it was Narnia we all 
wanted to get to?" 
"I suppose so," said Aravis. She was beginning to wonder what exactly she would do when she got there 
and was feeling a little lonely. 
"Of course, of course," said Bree hastily. "But there's no need to rush things, if you know what I mean." 

"No, I don't know what you mean," said Hwin. "Why don't you want to go?" 
"M-m-m, broo-hoo," muttered Bree. "Well, don't you see, Ma'am - it's an important occasion - returning 
to one's country - entering society - the best society - it is so essential to make a good impression - not 
perhaps looking quite ourselves, yet, eh?" 
Hwin broke out into a horse-laugh. "It's your tail, Bree! I see it all now. You want to wait till your tail's 
grown again! And we don't even know if tails are worn long in Narnia. Really, Bree, you're as vain as that 
Tarkheena in Tashbaan!" 
"You are silly, Bree," said Aravis. 
"By the Lion's Mane, Tarkheena, I'm nothing of the sort," said Bree indignantly. "I have a proper respect 
for myself and for my fellow horses, that's all." 
"Bree," said Aravis, who was not very interested in the cut of his tail, "I've been wanting to ask you 
something for a long time. Why do you keep on swearing By the Lion and By the Lion's Mane? I thought 
you hated lions." 
"So I do," answered Bree. "But when I speak of the Lion of course I mean Aslan, the great deliverer of 
Narnia who drove away the Witch and the Winter. All Narnians swear by him." 
"But is he a lion?" 
"No, no, of course not," said Bree in a rather shocked voice. 
"All the stories about him in Tashbaan say he is," replied Aravis. "And if he isn't a lion why do you call 
him a lion?" 

"Well, you'd hardly understand that at your age," said Bree. "And I was only a little foal when I left so I 
don't quite fully understand it myself." 
(Bree was standing with his back to the green wall while he said this, and the other two were facing him. 
He was talking in rather a superior tone with his eyes half shut; that was why he didn't see the changed 
expression in the faces of Hwin and Aravis. They had good reason to have open mouths and staring eyes; 
because while Bree spoke they saw an enormous lion leap up from outside and balance itself on the top of 
the green wall; only it was a brighter yellow and it was bigger and more beautiful and more alarming than 
any lion they had ever seen. And at once it jumped down inside the wall and began approaching Bree 
from behind. It made no noise at all. And Hwin and Aravis couldn't make any noise themselves, no more 
than if they were frozen.) 
"No doubt," continued Bree, "when they speak of him as a Lion they only mean he's as strong as a lion or 
(to our enemies, of course) as fierce as a lion. Or something of that kind. Even a little girl like you, 
Aravis, must see that it would be quite absurd to suppose he is a real lion. Indeed it would be 
disrespectful. If he was a lion he'd have to be a Beast just like the rest of us. Why!" (and here Bree began 
to laugh) "If he was a lion he'd have four paws, and a tail, and Whiskers! . . . Aie, ooh, hoo-hoo! Help!" 
For just as he said the word Whiskers one of Aslan's had actually tickled his ear. Bree shot away like an 
arrow to the other side of the enclosure and there turned; the wall was too high for him to jump and he 
could fly no farther. Aravis and Hwin both started back. There was about a second of intense silence. 
Then Hwin, though shaking all over, gave a strange little neigh, and trotted across to the Lion. 
"Please," she said, "you're so beautiful. You may eat me if you like. I'd sooner be eaten by you than fed 
by anyone else." 
"Dearest daughter," said Aslan, planting a lion's kiss on her twitching, velvet nose, "I knew you would 
not be long in coming to me. Joy shall be yours." 
Then he lifted his head and spoke in a louder voice. 

"Now, Bree," he said, "you poor, proud frightened Horse, draw near. Nearer still, my son. Do not dare 
not to dare. Touch me. Smell me. Here are my paws, here is my tail, these are my whiskers. I am a true 
Beast." 
"Aslan," said Bree in a shaken voice, "I'm afraid I must be rather a fool." 
"Happy the Horse who knows that while he is still young. Or the Human either. Draw near, Aravis my 
daughter. See! My paws are velveted. You will not be torn this time." 
"This time, sir?" said Aravis. 
"It was I who wounded you," said Aslan. "I am the only lion you met in all your journeyings. Do you 
know why I tore you?" 
"No, sir." 
"The scratches on your back, tear for tear, throb for throb, blood for blood, were equal to the stripes laid 
on the back of your stepmother's slave because of the drugged sleep you cast upon her. You needed to 
know what it felt like." 
"Yes, sir. Please-" 
"Ask on, my dear," said Aslan. 
"Will any more harm come to her by what I did?" 
"Child," said the Lion, "I am telling you your story, not hers. No one is told any story but their own." 
Then he shook his head and spoke in a lighter voice. 

"Be merry, little ones," he said. "We shall meet soon again. But before that you will have another 
visitor." Then in one bound he reached the top of the wall and vanished from their sight. 
Strange to say, they felt no inclination to talk to one another about him after he had gone. They all moved 
slowly away to different parts of the quiet grass and there paced to and fro, each alone, thinking. 
About half an hour later the two Horses were summoned to the back of the house to eat something nice 
that the Hermit had got ready for them and Aravis, still walking and thinking, was startled by the harsh 
sound of a trumpet outside the gate. 
"Who is there?" asked Aravis. 
"His Royal Highness Prince Cor of Archenland," said a voice from outside. 
Aravis undid the door and opened it, drawing back a little way to let the strangers in. 
Two soldiers with halberds came first and took their stand at each side of the entry. Then followed a 
herald, and the trumpeter. 
"His Royal Highness Prince Cor of Archenland desires an audience of the Lady Aravis," said the Herald. 
Then he and the trumpeter drew aside and bowed and the soldiers saluted and the Prince himself came in. 
All his attendants withdrew and closed the gate behind them. 
The Prince bowed, and a very clumsy bow for a Prince it was. Aravis curtsied in the Calormene style 
(which is not at all like ours) and did it very well because, of course, she had been taught how. Then she 
looked up and saw what sort of person this Prince was. 
She saw a mere boy. He was bare-headed and his fair hair was encircled with a very thin band of gold, 
hardly thicker than a wire. His upper tunic was of white cambric, as fine as a handkerchief, so that the 
bright red tunic beneath it showed through. His left hand, which rested on his enamelled sword hilt, was 
bandaged. 

Aravis looked twice at his face before she gasped and said, "Why! It's Shasta!" 
Shasta all at once turned very red and began speaking very quickly. "Look here, Aravis," he said, "I do 
hope you won't think I'm got up like this (and the trumpeter and all) to try to impress you or make out that 
I'm different or any rot of that sort. Because I'd far rather have come in my old clothes, but they're burnt 
now, and my father said -" 
"Your father?" said Aravis. 
"Apparently King Lune is my father," said Shasta. "I might really have guessed it. Corin being so like 
me. We were twins, you see. Oh, and my name isn't Shasta, it's Cor." 
"Cor is a nicer name than Shasta," said Aravis. 
"Brothers' names run like that in Archenland," said Shasta (or Prince Cor as we must now call him). 
"Like Dar and Darrin, Cole and Colin and so on." 
"Shasta - I mean Cor," said Aravis. "No, shut up. There's something I've got to say at once. I'm sorry I've 
been such a pig. But I did change before I knew you were a Prince, honestly I did: when you went back, 
and faced the Lion." 
"It wasn't really going to kill you at all, that Lion," said Cor. 
"I know," said Aravis, nodding. Both were still and solemn for a moment as each saw that the other knew 
about Aslan. 
Suddenly Aravis remembered Cor's bandaged hand. "I say!" she cried, "I forgot! You've been in a battle. 
Is that a wound?" 

"A mere scratch," said Cor, using for the first time a rather lordly tone. But a moment later he burst out 
laughing and said, "If you want to know the truth, it isn't a proper wound at all. I only took the skin off my 
knuckles just as any clumsy fool might do without going near a battle." 
"Still you were in the battle," said Aravis. "It must have been wonderful." 
"It wasn't at all like what I thought," said Cor. 
"But Sha - Cor, I mean - you haven't told me anything yet about King Lune and how he found out who 
you were." 
"Well, let's sit down," said Cor. "For it's rather a long story. And by the way, Father's an absolute brick. 
I'd be just as pleased - or very nearly - at finding he's my father even if he wasn't a king. Even though 
Education and all sorts of horrible things are going to happen to me. But you want the story. Well, Corin 
and I were twins. And about a week after we were both born, apparently, they took us to a wise old 
Centaur in Narnia to be blessed or something. Now this Centaur was a prophet as a good many Centaurs 
are. Perhaps you haven't seen any Centaurs yet? There were some in the battle yesterday. Most 
remarkable people, but I can't say I feel quite at home with them yet. I say, Aravis, there are going to be a 
lot of things to get used to in these Northern countries." 
"Yes, there are," said Aravis. "But get on with the story." 
"Well, as soon as he saw Corin and me, it seems this Centaur looked at me and said, A day will come 
when that boy will save Archenland from the deadliest danger in which ever she lay. So of course my 
Father and Mother were very pleased. But there was someone present who wasn't. This was a chap called 
the Lord Bar who had been Father's Lord Chancellor. And apparently he'd done something wrong - 
bezzling or some word like that - I didn't understand that part very well - and Father had had to dismiss 
him. But nothing else was done to him and he was allowed to go on living in Archenland. But he must 
have been as bad as he could be, for it came out afterwards he had been in the pay of the Tisroc and had 
sent a lot of secret information to Tashbaan. So as soon as he heard I was going to save Archenland from 
a great danger he decided I must be put out of the way. Well, he succeeded in kidnapping me (I don't 
exactly know how) and rode away down the Winding Arrow to the coast. He'd had everything prepared 
and there was a ship manned with his own followers lying ready for him and he put out to sea with me on 
board. But Father got wind of it, though not quite in time, and was after him as quickly as he could. The 
Lord Bar was already at sea when Father reached the coast, but not out of sight. And Father was 
embarked in one of his own warships within twenty minutes. 

"It must have been a wonderful chase. They were six days following Bar's galleon and brought her to 
battle on the seventh. It was a great sea-fight (I heard a lot about it yesterday evening) from ten o'clock in 
the morning till sunset. Our people took the ship in the end. But I wasn't there. The Lord Bar himself had 
been killed in the battle. But one of his men said that, early that morning, as soon as he saw he was certain 
to be overhauled, Bar had given me to one of his knights and sent us both away in the ship's boat. And 
that boat was never seen again. But of course that was the same boat that Aslan (he seems to be at the 
back of all the stories) pushed ashore at the right place for Arsheesh to pick me up. I wish I knew that 
knight's name, for he must have kept me alive and starved himself to do it." 
"I suppose Aslan would say that was part of someone else's story," said Aravis. 
"I was forgetting that," said Cor. 
"And I wonder how the prophecy will work out," said Aravis, "and what the great danger is that you're to 
save Archenland from." 
"Well," said Cor rather awkwardly, "they seem to think I've done it already." 
Aravis clapped her hands. "Why, of course!" she said. "How stupid I am. And how wonderful! 
Archenland can never be in much greater danger than it was when Rabadash had crossed the Arrow with 
his two hundred horse and you hadn't yet got through with your message. Don't you feel proud?" 
"I think I feel a bit scared," said Cor. 
"And you'll be living at Anvard now," said Aravis rather wistfully. 
"Oh!" said Cor, "I'd nearly forgotten what I came about. Father wants you to come and live with us. He 
says there's been no lady in the court (they call it the court, I don't know why) since Mother died. Do, 
Aravis. You'll like Father - and Corin. They're not like me; they've been properly brought up. You needn't 
be afraid that -" 

"Oh stop it," said Aravis, "or we'll have a real fight. Of course I'll come." 
"Now let's go and see the Horses," said Cor. 
There was a great and joyous meeting between Bree and Cor, and Bree, who was still in a rather subdued 
frame of mind, agreed to set out for Anvard at once: he and Hwin would cross into Narnia on the 
following day. All four bade an affectionate farewell to the Hermit and promised that they would soon 
visit him again. By about the middle of the morning they were on their way. The Horses had expected that 
Aravis and Cor would ride, but Cor explained that except in war, where everyone must do what he can do 
best, no one in Narnia or Archenland ever dreamed of mounting a Talking Horse. 
This reminded poor Bree again of how little he knew about Narnian customs and what dreadful mistakes 
he might make. So while Hwin strolled along in a happy dream, Bree got more nervous and more selfconscious 
with every step he took. 
"Buck up, Bree," said Cor. "It's far worse for me than for you. You aren't going to be educated. I shall be 
learning reading and writing and heraldry and dancing and history and music while you'll be galloping 
and rolling on the hills of Narnia to your heart's content." 
"But that's just the point," groaned Bree. "Do Talking Horses roll? Supposing they don't? I can't bear to 
give it up. What do you think, Hwin?" 
"I'm going to roll anyway," said Hwin. "I don't suppose any of them will care two lumps of sugar whether 
you roll or not." 
"Are we near that castle?" said Bree to Cor. 
"Round the next bend," said the Prince. 
"Well," said Bree, "I'm going to have a good one now: it may be the last. Wait for me a minute." 

It was five minutes before he rose again, blowing hard and covered with bits of bracken. 
"Now I'm ready," he said in a voice of profound gloom. "Lead on, Prince Cor, Narnia and the North." 
But he looked more like a horse going to a funeral than a long-lost captive returning to home and 
freedom. 
THE next turn of the road- brought them out from among the trees and there, across green lawns, 
sheltered from the north wind by the high wooded ridge at its back, they saw the castle of Anvard. It was 
very old and built of a warm, reddish-brown stone. 
Before they had reached the gate King Lune came out to meet them, not looking at all like Aravis's idea 
of a king and wearing the oldest of old clothes; for he had just come from making a round of the kennels 
with his Huntsman and had only stopped for a moment to wash his doggy hands. But the bow with which 
he greeted Aravis as he took her hand would have been stately enough for an Emperor. 
"Little lady," he said, "we bid you very heartily welcome. If my dear wife were still alive we could make 
you better cheer but could not do it with a better will. And I am sorry that you have had misfortunes and 
been driven from your father's house, which cannot but be a grief to you. My son Cor has told me about 
your adventures together and all your valour." 
"It was he who did all that, Sir," said Aravis. "Why, he rushed at a lion to save me." 

"Eh, what's that?" said King Lune, his face brightening. "I haven't heard that part of the story." 
Then Aravis told it. And Cor, who had very much wanted the story to be known, though he felt he 
couldn't tell it himself, didn't enjoy it so much as he had expected, and indeed felt rather foolish. But his 
father enjoyed it very much indeed and in the course of the next few weeks told it to so many people that 
Cor wished it had never happened. 
Then the King turned to Hwin and Bree and was just as polite to them as to Aravis, and asked them a lot 
of questions about their families and where they had lived in Narnia before they had been captured. The 
Horses were rather tongue-tied for they weren't yet used to being talked to as equals by Humans grown-up 
Humans, that is. They didn't mind Aravis and Cor. 
Presently Queen Lucy came out from the castle and joined them and King Lune said to Aravis, "My dear, 
here is a loving friend of our house, and she has been seeing that your apartments are put to rights for you 
better than I could have done it." 
"You'd like to come and see them, wouldn't you?" said Lucy, kissing Aravis. They liked each other at 
once and soon went away together to talk about Aravis's bedroom and Aravis's boudoir and about getting 
clothes for her, and all the sort of things girls do talk about on such an occasion. 
After lunch, which they had on the terrace (it was cold birds and cold game pie and wine and bread and 
cheese), King Lune ruffled up his brow and heaved a sigh and said, "Heigh-ho! We have still that sorry 
creature Rabadash on our hands, my friends, and must needs resolve what to do with him." 
Lucy was sitting on the King's right and Aravis on his left. King Edmund sat at one end of the table and 
the Lord Darrin faced him at the other. Dar and Peridan and Cor and Corin were on the same side as the 
King. 
"Your Majesty would have a perfect right to strike off his head," said Peridan. "Such an assault as he 
made puts him on a level with assassins." 
"It is very true," said Edmund. "But even a traitor may mend. I have known one that did." And he looked 
very thoughtful. 

"To kill this Rabadash would go near to raising war with the Tisroc," said Darrin. 
"A fig for the Tisroc," said King Lune. "His strength is in numbers and numbers will never cross the 
desert. But I have no stomach for killing men (even traitors) in cold blood. To have cut his throat in the 
battle would have eased my heart mightily, but this is a different thing." 
"By my counsel," said Lucy, "your Majesty shall give him another trial. Let him go free on strait promise 
of fair dealing in the future. It may be that he will keep his word." 
"Maybe Apes will grow honest, Sister," said Edmund. "But, by the Lion, if he breaks it again, may it be 
in such time and place that any of us could swap off his head in clean battle." 
"It shall be tried," said the King: and then to one of the attendants, "Send for the prisoner, friend." 
Rabadash was brought before them in chains. To look at him anyone would have supposed that he had 
passed the night in a noisome dungeon without food or water; but in reality he had been shut up in quite a 
comfortable room and provided with an excellent supper. But as he was sulking far too furiously to touch 
the supper and had spent the whole night stamping and roaring and cursing, he naturally did not now look 
his best. 
"Your royal Highness needs not to be told," said King Lune, "that by the law of nations as well as by all 
reasons of prudent policy, we have as good right to your head as ever one mortal man had against another. 
Nevertheless, in consideration of your youth and the ill nurture, devoid of all gentilesse and courtesy, 
which you have doubtless had in the land of slaves and tyrants, we are disposed to set you free, unharmed, 
on these conditions: first, that-" 
"Curse you for a barbarian dog!" spluttered Rabadash. "Do you think I will even hear your conditions? 
Faugh! You talk very largely of nurture and I know not what. It's easy, to a man in chains, ha! Take off 
these vile bonds, give me a sword, and let any of you who dares then debate with me." 
Nearly all the lords sprang to their feet, and Corin shouted: 

"Father! Can I box him? Please." 
"Peace! Your Majesties! My Lords!" said King Lune. "Have we no more gravity among us than to be so 
chafed by the taunt of a pajock? Sit down, Corin, or shaft leave the table. I ask your Highness again, to 
hear our conditions." 
"I hear no conditions from barbarians and sorcerers," said Rabadash. "Not one of you dare touch a hair of 
my head. Every insult you have heaped on me shall be paid with oceans of Narnian and Archenlandish 
blood. Terrible shall the vengeance of the Tisroc be: even now. But kill me, and the burnings and 
torturings in these northern lands shall become a tale to frighten the world a thousand years hence. 
Beware! Beware! Beware! The bolt of Tash falls from above!" 
"Does it ever get caught on a hook half-way?" asked Corin. 
"Shame, Corin," said the King. "Never taunt a man save when he is stronger than you: then, as you 
please." 
"Oh you foolish Rabadash," sighed Lucy. 
Next moment Cor wondered why everyone at the table had risen and was standing perfectly still. Of 
course he did the same himself. And then he saw the reason. Aslan was among them though no one had 
seen him coming. Rabadash started as the immense shape of the Lion paced softly in between him and his 
accusers. 
"Rabadash," said Aslan. "Take heed. Your doom is very near, but you may still avoid it. Forget your 
pride (what have you to be proud of?) and your anger (who has done you wrong?) and accept the mercy of 
these good kings." 
Then Rabadash rolled his eyes and spread out his mouth into a horrible, long mirthless grin like a shark, 
and wagged his ears up and down (anyone can learn how to do this if they take the trouble). He had 
always found this very effective in Calormen. The bravest had trembled when he made these faces, and 

ordinary people had fallen to the floor, and sensitive people had often fainted. But what Rabadash hadn't 
realized is that it is very easy to frighten people who know you can have them boiled alive the moment 
you give the word. The grimaces didn't look at all alarming in Archenland; indeed Lucy only thought 
Rabadash was going to be sick. 
"Demon! Demon! Demon!" shrieked the Prince. "I know you. You are the foul fiend of Narnia. You are 
the enemy of the gods. Learn who I am, horrible phantasm. I am descended from Tash, the inexorable, the 
irresistible. the curse of Tash is upon you. Lightning in the shape of scorpions shall be rained on you. The 
mountains of Narnia shall be ground into dust. The-" 
"Have a care, Rabadash," said Aslan quietly. "The doom is nearer now: it is at the door: it has lifted the 
latch." 
"Let the skies fall," shrieked Rabadash. "Let the earth gape! Let blood and fire obliterate the world! But 
be sure I will never desist till I have dragged to my palace by her hair the barbarian queen, the daughter of 
dogs, the -" 
"The hour has struck," said Aslan: and Rabadash saw, to his supreme horror, that everyone had begun to 
laugh. 
They couldn't help it. Rabadash had been wagging his ears all the time and as soon as Aslan said, "The 
hour has struck!" the ears began to change. They grew longer and more pointed and soon were covered 
with grey hair. And while everyone was wondering where they had seen ears like that before, Rabadash's 
face began to change too. It grew longer, and thicker at the top and larger eyed, and the nose sank back 
into the face (or else the face swelled out and became all nose) and there was hair all over it. And his arms 
grew longer and came down in front of him till his hands were resting on the ground: only they weren't 
hands, now, they were hoofs. And he was standing on all fours, and his clothes disappeared, and everyone 
laughed louder and louder (because they couldn't help it) for now what had been Rabadash was, simply 
and unmistakably, a donkey. The terrible thing was that his human speech lasted just a moment longer 
than his human shape, so that when he realized the change that was coming over him, he screamed out: 
"Oh, not a Donkey! Mercy! If it were even a horse - e'en - a hor - eeh - auh, eeh-auh." And so the words 
died away into a donkey's bray. 
"Now hear me, Rabadash," said Aslan. "Justice shall be mixed with mercy. You shall not always be an 
Ass." 

At this of course the Donkey twitched its ears forward and that also was so funny that everybody laughed 
all the more. They tried not to, but they tried in vain. 
"You have appealed to Tash," said Aslan. "And in the temple of Tash you shall be healed. You must 
stand before the altar of Tash in Tashbaan at the great Autumn Feast this year and there, in the sight of all 
Tashbaan, your ass's shape will fall from you and all men will know you for Prince Rabadash. But as long 
as you live, if ever you go more than ten miles away from the great temple in Tashbaan you shall instantly 
become again as you now are. And from that second change there will be no return." 
There was a short silence and then they all stirred and looked at one another as if they were waking from 
sleep. Aslan was gone. But there was a brightness in the air and on the grass, and a joy in their hearts, 
which assured them that he had been no dream: and anyway, there was the donkey in front of them. 
King Lune was the kindest-hearted of men and on seeing his enemy in this regrettable condition he forgot 
all his anger. 
"Your royal Highness," he said. "I am most truly sorry that things have come to this extremity. Your 
Highness will bear witness that it was none of our doing. And of course we shall be delighted to provide 
your Highness with shipping back to Tashbaan for the - er - treatment which Aslan has prescribed. You 
shall have every comfort which your Highness's situation allows: the best of the cattleboats - the freshest 
carrots and thistles -" 
But a deafening bray from the Donkey and a well-aimed kick at one of the guards made it clear that these 
kindly offers were ungratefully received. 
And here, to get him out of the way, I'd better finish off the story of Rabadash. He (or it) was duly sent 
back by boat to Tashbaan and brought into the temple of Tash at the great Autumn Festival, and then he 
became a man again. But of course four or five thousand people had seen the transformation and the affair 
could not possibly be hushed up. And after the old Tisroc's death when Rabadash became Tisroc in his 
place he turned out the most peaceable Tisroc Calormen had ever known. This was because, not daring to 
go more than ten miles from Tashbaan, he could never go on a war himself: and he didn't want his 
Tarkaans to win fame in the wars at his expense, for that is the way Tisrocs get overthrown. But though 
his reasons were selfish, it made things much more comfortable for all the smaller countries round 
Calormen. His own people never forgot that he had been a donkey. During his reign, and to his face, he 
was called Rabadash the Peacemaker, but after his death and behind his back he was called Rabadash the 

Ridiculous, and if you look him up in a good History of Calormen (try the local library) you will find him 
under that name. And to this day in Calormene schools, if you do anything unusually stupid, you are very 
likely to be called "a second Rabadash". 
Meanwhile at Anvard everyone was very glad that he had been disposed of before the real fun began, 
which was a grand feast held that evening on the lawn before the castle, with dozens of lanterns to help 
the moonlight. And the wine flowed and tales were told and jokes were cracked, and then silence was 
made and the King's poet with two fiddlers stepped out into the middle of the circle. Aravis and Cor 
prepared themselves to be bored, for the only poetry they knew was the Calormene kind, and you know 
now what that was like. But at the very first scrape of the fiddles a rocket seemed to go up inside their 
heads, and the poet sang the great old lay of Fair Olvin and how he fought the Giant Pire and turned him 
into stone (and that is the origin of Mount Pire - it was a two-headed Giant) and won the Lady Liln for his 
bride; and when it was over they wished it was going to begin again. And though Bree couldn't sing he 
told the story of the fight at Zalindreh. And Lucy told again (they had all, except Aravis and Cor, heard it 
many times but they all wanted it again) the tale of the Wardrobe and how she and King Edmund and 
Queen Susan and Peter the High King had first come into Narnia. 
And presently, as was certain to happen sooner or later, King Lune said if was time for young people to 
be in bed. "And tomorrow, Cor," he added, "shalt come over all the castle with me and see the estres and 
mark all its strength and weakness: for it will be thine to guard when I'm gone." 
"But Corin will be the King then, Father," said Cor. 
"Nay, lad," said King Lune, "thou art my heir. The crown comes to thee." 
"But I don't want it," said Cor. "I'd far rather-" 
"'Tis no question what thou wantest, Cor, nor I either. 'Tis in the course of law." 
"But if we're twins we must be the same age." 
"Nay," said the King with a laugh. "One must come first. Art Corin's elder by full twenty minutes. And 
his better too, let's hope, though that's no great mastery." And he looked at Corin with a twinkle in his 
eyes. 

"But, Father, couldn't you make whichever you like to be the next King?" 
"No. The king's under the law, for it's the law makes him a king. Hast no more power to start away from 
thy crown than any sentry from his post." 
"Oh dear," said Cor. "I don't want to at all. And Corin - I am most dreadfully sorry. I never dreamed my 
turning up was going to chisel you out of your kingdom." 
"Hurrah! Hurrah!" said Corin. "I shan't have to be King. I shan't have to be King. I'll always be a prince. 
It's princes have all the fun." 
"And that's truer than thy brother knows, Cor," said King Lune. "For this is what it means to be a king: to 
be first in every desperate attack and last in every desperate retreat, and when there's hunger in the land 
(as must be now and then in bad years) to wear finer clothes and laugh louder over a scantier meal than 
any man in your land." 
When the two boys were going upstairs to bed Cor again asked Corin if nothing could be done about it. 
And Corin said: 
"If you say another word about it, I'll - I'll knock you down." 
It would be nice to end the story by saying that after that the two brothers never disagreed about anything 
again, but I am afraid it would not be true. In reality they quarrelled and fought just about as often as any 
other two boys would, and all their fights ended (if they didn't begin) with Cor getting knocked down. For 
though, when they had both grown up and become swordsmen, Cor was the more dangerous man in 
battle, neither he nor anyone else in the North Countries could ever equal Corin as a boxer. That was how 
he got his name of Corin Thunder-Fist; and how he performed his great exploit against the Lapsed Bear of 
Stormness, which was really a Talking Bear but had gone back to Wild Bear habits. Corm climbed up to 
its lair on the Narnian side of Stormness one winter day when the snow was on the hills and boxed it 
without a time-keeper for thirty-three rounds. And at the end it couldn't see out of its eyes and became a 
reformed character. 

Aravis also had many quarrels (and, I'm afraid, even fights) with Cor, but they always made it up again: 
so that years later, when they were grown up, they were so used to quarrelling and making it up again that 
they got married so as to go on doing it more conveniently. And after King Lune's death they made a good 
King and Queen of Archenland and Ram the Great, the most famous of all the kings of Archenland, was 
their son. Bree and Hwin lived happily to a great age in Narnia and both got married but not to one 
another. And there weren't many months in which one or both of them didn't come trotting over the pass 
to visit their friends at Anvard. 
THIS story can be read by itself but is also a sequel to Out of the Silent Planet in which some account
was given of Ransom's adventures in Mars-or, as its inhabitants call it, Malacandra. All the human
characters in this book are purely fictitious and none of them is allegorical. C.S.L.
First published 1943 by John Lane the Bodley Head Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain by Richard Clay {The Chaucer Press), Ltd., Bungay, Suffolk
As I left the railway station at Worchester and set out on the three-mile walk to Ransom's cottage, I
reflected that no one on that platform could possibly guess the truth about the man I was going to visit.
The flat heath which spread out before me (for the village lies all behind and to the north of the station)
looked an ordinary heath. The gloomy five-o'clock sky was such as you might see on any autumn
afternoon. The few houses and the clumps of red or yellowish trees were in no way remarkable. Who
could imagine that a little farther on in that quiet landscape I should meet and shake by the hand a man
who had lived and eaten and drunk in a world forty million miles distant from London, who had seen
this Earth from where it looks like a mere point of green fire, and who had spoken face to face with a
creature whose life began before our own planet was inhabitable?
For Ransom had met other things in Mars besides the Martians. He had met the creatures called eldila,
and specially that great eldil who is the ruler of Mars or, in their speech, the Oyarsa of Malacandra. The
eldila are very different from any planetary creatures. Their physical organism, if organism it can be
called, is quite unlike either the human or the Martian. They do not eat, breed, breathe, or suffer natural
death, and to that extent resemble thinking minerals more than they resemble anything we should
recognise as an animal. Though they appear on planets and may even seem to our senses to be
sometimes resident in them, the precise spatial location of an eldil at any moment presents great
problems. They themselves regard space (or Deep Heaven) as their true habitat, and the planets are to
them not closed worlds but merely moving points-perhaps even interruptions-in what we know as the
Solar System and they as the Field of Arbol.
At present I was going to see Ransom in answer to a wire which had said 'Come down Thursday if
possible. Business.' I guessed what sort of business he meant, and that was why I kept on telling myself
that it would be perfectly delightful to spend a night with Ransom and also kept on feeling that I was not
enjoying the prospect as much as I ought to. It was the eldila that were my trouble. I could just get used
to the fact that Ransom had been to Mars ... but to have met an eldil, to have spoken with something
whose life appeared to be practically unending. Even the journey to Mars was bad enough. A man who
has been in another world does not come back unchanged. One can't put the difference into words. When
the man is a friend it may become painful: the old footing is not easy to recover. But much worse was
my growing conviction that, since his return, the eldila were not leaving him alone. Little things in his
conversation, little mannerisms, accidental allusions which he made and then drew back with an
awkward apology, all suggested that he was keeping strange company; that there were-well visitors-at
that cottage.
As I plodded along the empty, unfenced road which runs across the middle of Worchester Common I
tried to dispel my growing sense of malaise by analysing it. What, after all, was I afraid of? The moment
I had put this question I regretted it. I was shocked to find that I had mentally used the word 'afraid'. Up
till then I had tried to pretend that I was feeling only distaste, or embarrassment, or even boredom. But
the mere word afraid had let the cat out of the bag. I realised now that my emotion was neither more, nor
less, nor other, than fear. And I realised that I was afraid of two things-afraid that sooner or later I
myself might meet an eldil, and afraid that I might get 'drawn in'. I suppose everyone knows this fear of
getting 'drawn in'-the moment at which a man realises that what had seemed mere speculations are on
the point of landing him in the Communist Party or the Christian Church-the sense that a door has just
slammed and left him on the inside. The thing was such sheer bad luck. Ransom himself had been taken
to Mars (or Malacandra) against his will and almost by accident, and I had become connected with his
affair by another accident. Yet here we were both getting more and more involved in what I could only
describe as inter-planetary politics. As to ' my intense wish never to come into contact with the eldila
myself, I am not sure whether I can make you understand it. It ' was something more than a prudent
desire to avoid creatures , ' alien in kind, very powerful, and very intelligent. The truth was that all I
heard about them served to connect two things which one's mind tends to keep separate, and that
connecting gave one a sort of shock. We tend to think about non-human intelligences in two distinct
categories which we label 'normal' and 'supernatural' respectively. We think, in one mood, of Mr. Wells'
Martians (very unlike the real Malacandrians, by ' the bye), or his Selenites. In quite a different mood we
let our minds loose on the possibility of angels, ghosts, fairies, and the like. But the very moment we are
compelled to recognise a creature in either class as real the distinction begins to get blurred: and when it
is a creature like an eldil the distinction vanishes altogether. These things were not animals-to that extent
one had to classify them with the second group; but they had some kind of material vehicle whose
presence could (in principle) be scientifically verified. To that extent they belonged to the first group.
The distinction between natural and supernatural, in fact, broke down; and when it had done so, one
realised how great a comfort it had been-how it had eased the burden of intolerable strangeness which
this universe imposes on us by dividing it into two halves and encouraging the mind never to think of
both in the same context. What price we may have paid for this comfort in the way of false security and
accepted confusion of thought is another matter.
'This is a long, dreary road,' I thought to myself. 'Thank goodness I haven't anything to carry.' And then,
with a start of realisation, I remembered that I ought to be carrying a pack, containing my things for the
night. I swore to myself. I must have left the thing in the train. Will you believe me when I say that my
immediate impulse was to turn back to the station and 'do something about it'? Of course there was
nothing to be done which could not equally well be done by ringing up from the cottage. That train, with
my pack in it, must by this time be miles away.
I realise that now as clearly as you do. But at the moment it seemed perfectly obvious that I must retrace
my steps, and I had indeed begun to do so before reason or conscience awoke and set me once more
plodding forwards. In doing this I discovered more clearly than before how very little I wanted to do it.
It was such hard work that I felt as if I were walking against a headwind; but in fact it was one of those
still, dead evenings when no twig stirs, and beginning to be a little foggy.
The farther I went the more impossible I found it to think about anything except these eldila. What, after
all, did Ransom really know about them? By his own account the sorts which he had met did not usually
visit our own planet-or had only begun to do so since his return from Mars. We had eldila of our own, he
said. Tellurian eldils, but they were of a different kind and mostly hostile to man. That, in fact, was why
our world was cut off from communication with the other planets. He described us as being in a state of
siege, as being, in fact, an enemy-occupied territory, held down by eldils who were at war both with us
and with the eldils of 'Deep Heaven', or 'space'. Like the bacteria on the microscopic level, so these coinhabiting
pests on the macroscopic permeate our whole life invisibly and are the real explanation of that
fatal bent which is the main lesson of history. If all this were true, then, of course, we should welcome
the fact that eldila of a better kind had at last broken the frontier (it is, they say, at the Moon's orbit) and
were beginning to visit us. Always assuming that Ransom's account was the correct one.
A nasty idea occurred to me. Why should not Ransom be a dupe? If something from outer space were
trying to invade our planet, what better smoke-screen could it put up than this very story of Ransom's?
Was there the slightest evidence, after all, for the existence of the supposed maleficent eldils on this
earth? How if my friend were the unwitting bridge, the Trojan Horse, whereby some possible invader
were effecting its landing on Tellus?, And then once more, just as when I had discovered that I had to
pack, the impulse to go no farther returned to me. "Go back, go back," it whispered to me, "send him a
wire, tell him you were ill, say you'll come some other time-anything." The strength of the feeling
astonished me. I stood still for a few moments telling myself not to be a fool, and when I finally resumed
my walk I was wondering whether this might be the beginning of a nervous breakdown. No sooner had
this idea occurred to me than it also became a new reason for not visiting Ransom. Obviously, I wasn't
fit for any such jumpy 'business' as his telegram almost certainly referred to. I wasn't even fit to spend an
ordinary weekend away from home. My only sensible course was to turn back at once and get safe
home, before I lost my memory or became hysterical, and to put myself in the hands of a doctor. It was
sheer madness to go on. '
I was now coming to the end of the heath and going down a ' small hill, with a copse on my left and
some apparently deserted industrial buildings on my right. At the bottom the evening ' mist was partly
thick. 'They call it a Breakdown at first. Wasn't there some mental disease in which quite ordinary
objects looked to the patient unbelievably ominous?..
 looked, in fact, just as that abandoned factory looks to me now? Great bulbous shapes of cement,
strange brickwork bogeys, glowered at me over dry scrubby grass pock-marked with grey pools and
intersected with the remains of a light railway. I was reminded of things which Ransom had seen in that
other world: only there, they were people. Long spindle-like giants whom he calls Sorns. What made it
worse was that he regarded them as good people-very much nicer, in fact, than our own race. He was in
league with them! How did I know he was even a dupe? He might be something worse .. . and again I
came to a standstill.
The reader, not knowing Ransom, will not understand how contrary to all reason this idea was. The
rational part of my mind, even at that moment, knew perfectly well that even if the whole universe were
crazy and hostile. Ransom was sane and wholesome and honest. And this part of my mind in the end
sent me forward-but with a reluctance and a difficulty I can hardly put into words. What enabled me to
go on was the knowledge (deep down inside me) that I was getting nearer at every stride to the one
friend: but I felt that I was getting nearer to the one enemy-the traitor, the sorcerer, the man in league
with 'them' .. . walking into the trap with my eyes open, like a fool. "They call it a breakdown at first,"
said my mind, "and send you to a nursing home; later on they move you to an asylum."
I was past the dead factory now, down in the fog, where it was very cold. Then came a moment-the first
one-of absolute terror and I had to bite my lip to keep myself from screaming. It was only a cat that had
run across the road, but I found myself completely unnerved. "Soon you will really be screaming," said
my inner tormentor, "running round and round, screaming, and you won't be able to stop it."
There was a little empty house by the side of the road, with most of the windows boarded up and one
staring like the eye of a dead fish. Please understand that at ordinary times the idea of a 'haunted house'
means no more to me than it does to you. No more; but also, no less. At that moment it was nothing so
definite as the thought of a ghost that came to me. It was just the word 'haunted'. 'Haunted'. . .
'haunting' . . . what a quality there is in that first syllable! Would not a child who had never heard the
word before and did not know its meaning shudder at the mere sound if, as the day was closing in, it
heard one of its elders say to another "This house is haunted"?
At last I came to the crossroads by the little Wesleyan chapel where I had to turn to the left under the
beech trees. I ought to be seeing the lights from Ransom's windows by now-or was it past blackout time?
My watch had stopped, and I didn't know. It was dark enough but that might be due to the fog and the
trees. It wasn't the dark I was afraid of, you understand. We have all known times when inanimate
objects seemed to have almost a facial expression, and it was the expression of this bit of road which I
did not like. "It's not true," said my mind, • "that people who are really going mad never think they're
going mad." Suppose that real insanity had chosen this place in which to begin? In that case, of course,
the black enmity of those dripping trees-their horrible expectancy-would be a hallucination. But that did
not make it any better. To think that the spectre you see is an illusion does not rob him of his terrors: it
simply adds the further terror of madness itself-and then on top of that the horrible surmise that those
whom the rest call mad have, all along, been the only people who see the world as it really is.
This was upon me now. I staggered on into the cold and the darkness, already half convinced that I must
be entering what is called Madness. But each moment my opinion about sanity changed. Had it ever
been more than a convention-a comfortable set of blinkers, an agreed mode of wishful thinking, which
excluded from our view the full strangeness and malevolence of the universe we are compelled to
inhabit? The things I had begun to know during the last few months of my acquaintance with Ransom
already amounted to more than 'sanity' would admit; but I had come much too far to dismiss them as
unreal. I doubted his interpretation, or his good faith. I did not doubt the existence of the things he had
met in Mars -the Pfifltriggi, the Hrossa, and the Sorns-nor of these interplanetary eldila. I did not even
doubt the reality of that mysterious being whom the eldila call Maleldil and to whom they appear to give
a total obedience such as no Tellurian dictator can command. I knew what Ransom supposed Maleldil to
be.
Surely that was the cottage. It was very well blacked-out. A childish, whining thought arose on my
mind: why was he not out at the gate to welcome me? An even more childish thought followed. Perhaps
he was in the garden waiting for me, hiding. Perhaps he would jump on me from behind. Perhaps I
should see a figure that looked like Ransom standing with its back to me and when I spoke to it, it would
turn round and show a face that was not human at all. ...
I have naturally no wish to enlarge on this phase of my story. The state of mind I was in was one which I
look back on with humiliation. I would have passed it over if I did not think that some account of it was
necessary for a full understanding of what follows-and, perhaps, of some other things as well. At all
events, I can't really describe how I reached the front door of the cottage. Somehow or other, despite the
loathing and dismay that pulled me back and a sort of invisible wall of resistance that met me in the face,
fighting for each step, and almost shrieking as a harmless spray of the hedge touched my face, I
managed to get through the gate and up the little path. And there I was, drumming on the door and
wringing the handle and shouting to him to let me in as if my life depended on it.
There was no reply-not a sound except the echo of the sounds I had been making myself. There was only
something white fluttering on the knocker. I guessed, of course, that it was a note. In striking a match to
read it by, I discovered how Very shaky my hands had become; and when the match went out I realised
how dark the evening had grown. After several attempts I read the thing. 'Sorry. Had to go up to
Cambridge. Shan't be back till the late train. Eatables in larder and bed made up in your usual room.
Don't wait supper for me unless you feel like it-E. R.' And immediately the impulse to retreat, which had
already assailed me several times, leaped upon me with a sort of demoniac violence. Here was my
retreat left open, positively inviting me. Now was my chance. If anyone expected me to go into that
house and sit there alone for several hours, they were mistaken! But then, as the thought of the return
journey began to take shape in my mind, I faltered. The idea of setting out to traverse the avenue of
beech trees again (it was really dark now) with this house behind me (one had the absurd feeling that it
could follow one) was not attractive. And then, I hope, something better came into my mind-some rag of
sanity and some reluctance to let Ransom down. At least I could try the door to see if it were really
unlocked. I did. And it was. Next moment, I hardly know how, I found myself inside and let it slam
behind me.
It was quite dark, and warm. I groped a few paces forward, I hit my shin violently against something,
and fell. I sat still for a few seconds nursing my leg. I thought I knew the -layout of Ransom's hallsitting-room
pretty well and couldn't imagine what I had blundered into. Presently I groped in my
pocket, got out my matches, and tried to strike a light. The head of the match flew off. I stamped on it
and sniffed to make sure it was not smouldering on the carpet. As soon as I sniffed I became aware of a
strange smell in the room. I could not for the life of me make out what it was. It had an unlikeness to
ordinary domestic smells as great as that of some chemicals, but it was not a chemical kind of smell at
all. Then I struck another match. It nickered and went out almost at once-not unnaturally, since I was
sitting on the door-mat and there are few front doors even in better built houses than Ransom's country
cottage which do not admit a draught. I had seen nothing by it except the palm of my own hand
hollowed in an attempt to guard the flame. Obviously I must get away from the door. I rose gingerly and
felt my way forward. I came at once to an obstacle-something smooth and very cold that rose a little
higher than my knees. As I touched it I realised that it was the source of the smell. I groped my way
along this to the left and finally came to the end of it. It seemed to present several surfaces and I couldn't
picture the shape. It was not a table, for it had no top. One's hand groped along the rim of a kind of low
wall-the thumb on the outside and the fingers down inside the enclosed space. If it had felt like wood I
should have supposed it to be a large packing-case. But it was not wood. I thought for a moment that it
was wet, but soon decided that I was mistaking coldness for moisture. When I reached the end of it I
struck my third match.
I saw something white and semi-transparent-rather like ice. A great big thing, very long: a kind of box,
an open box: and of a disquieting shape which I did not immediately recognise. It was big enough to put
a man into. Then I took a step back, lifting the lighted match higher to get a more comprehensive view,
and instantly tripped over something behind me. I found myself sprawling in darkness, not on the carpet,
but on more of the cold substance with the odd smell. How many of the infernal things were there?
I was just preparing to rise again and hunt systematically round the room for a candle when I heard
Ransom's name pronounced, and almost, but not quite, simultaneously I saw the thing I had feared so
long to see. I heard Ransom's name pronounced : but I should not like to say I heard a voice pronounce
it. The sound was quite astonishingly unlike a voice. It was perfectly articulate: it was even, I suppose,
rather beautiful. But it was, if you understand me, inorganic. We feel the difference between animal
voices (including those of the human animal) and all other noises pretty clearly, I fancy, though it is hard
to define. Blood and lungs and the warm, moist cavity of the mouth are somehow indicated in every
Voice. Here they were not. The two syllables sounded more as if they were played on an instrument than
as if they were spoken: and yet they did not sound mechanical either. A machine is something we make
out of natural materials, this was more as if rock or crystal or light had spoken of itself. And it went
through me from chest to groin like the thrill that goes through you when you think you have lost your
hold while climbing a cliff.
That was what I heard. What I saw was simply a very faint rod or pillar of light. I don't think it made a
circle of light either on the floor or the ceiling, but I am not sure of this. It certainly had very little power
of illuminating its surroundings. So far, all is plain sailing. But it had two other characteristics which are
less easy to grasp. One was its colour. Since I saw the thing I must obviously have seen it either white or
coloured; but no efforts of my memory can conjure up the faintest image of what that colour was. I try
blue, and gold, and violet, and red, but none of them will fit. How it is possible to have a visual
experience which immediately and ever after becomes impossible to remember, I do not attempt to
explain. The other was its angle. It was not at right angles to the floor. But as soon as I have said this, I
hasten to add that this way of putting it is a later reconstruction. What one actually felt at the moment
was that the column of light was vertical but the floor was not horizontal-the whole room seemed to
have heeled over as if it were on board ship. The impression, however produced, was that this creature
had reference to some horizontal, to some whole system of directions, based outside the Earth, and that
its mere presence imposed that alien system on me and abolished the terrestrial horizontal.
I had no doubt at all that I was seeing an eldil, and little doubt that I was seeing the archon of Mars, the
Oyarsa of Malacandra. And now that the thing had happened I was no longer in a condition of abject
panic. My sensations were, it is true, in some ways very unpleasant. The fact that it was quite obviously
not organic-the knowledge that intelligence was somehow located in this homogeneous cylinder of light
but not related to it as our consciousness is related to our brains and nerves-was profoundly disturbing. It
would not fit into our categories. The response which we ordinarily make to a living creature and that
which we make to an inanimate object were here both equally inappropriate. On the other hand, all those
doubts which I had felt before I entered the cottage as to whether these creatures were friend or foe, and
whether Ransom were a pioneer or a dupe, had for the moment vanished. My fear was now of another
kind. I felt sure that the creature was what we call 'good', but I wasn't sure whether I liked 'goodness' so
much as I had supposed. This is a very terrible experience. As long as what you are afraid of is
something evil, you may still hope that the good may come to your rescue. But suppose you struggle
through to the good and find that it also is dreadful? How if food itself turns out to be the very thing you
can't eat, and home the very place you can't live, and your very comforter the person who makes you
uncomfortable? Then, indeed, there is no rescue possible: the last card has been played. For a second or
two I was nearly in that condition. Here at last was a bit of that world from beyond the world;
which I had always supposed that I loved and desired, breaking through and appearing to my senses: and
I didn't like it, I wanted it to go away. I wanted every possible distance, gulf, curtain, blanket, and barrier
to be placed between it and me. But I did not fall quite into the gulf. Oddly enough my very sense of
helplessness saved me and steadied me. For now I was quite obviously 'drawn in'. The struggle was
over. The next decision did not lie with me.
Then, like a noise from a different world, came the opening of the door and the sound of boots on the
doormat, and I saw, silhouetted against the greyness of the night in the open doorway, a figure which I
recognised as Ransom. The speaking which was not a voice came again out of the rod of light: and
Ransom, instead of moving, stood still and answered it. Both speeches were in a strange polysyllabic
language which I had not heard before. I make no attempt to excuse the feelings which awoke in me
when I heard the unhuman sound addressing my friend and my friend answering it in the unhuman
language. They are, in fact, inexcusable; but if you think they are improbable at such a juncture, I must
tell you plainly that you have read neither history nor your own heart to much effect. They were feelings
of resentment, horror, and jealousy. It was in my mind to shout out, 'Leave your familiar alone, you
damned magician, and attend to Me.'
What I actually said was, "Oh, Ransom. Thank God you've come."
1* In the text I naturally keep to what I thought and felt at the time, since this alone is first-hand
evidence: but there is obviously room for more further speculation about the form in which eldila appear
to our senses. The only serious considerations of the problem so far are to be sought in the early
seventeenth century. As a starting point for future investigation I recommend the following from
Natvilcius (De Aethereo et asrio Corpore, Basel. 1627, II. xii.), liquet simplicem flam-mem sensibus
nostris subjectcan non esse corpus proprie dictum angeli vel daemonis, sed potius aut illius carports
sensorium aut super/idem corporis in coelesti dispositions locorum supra cogitationes humanas
existentis ('It appears that the homogeneous flame perceived by our senses is not the body, properly so
called, of an angel or daemon, but rather either the sensorium of that body or the surface of a body
which exists after a manner beyond our conception in the celestial frame of spatial references'). By the
'celestial frame of references' I take him to mean what we should now call 'multi-dimensional space'.
Not, of course, that Natvilcius knew anything about multi-dimensional geometry, but that he had
reached empirically what mathematics has since reached on theoretical grounds.
THE door was slammed (for the second time that night) and after a moment's groping Ransom had
found and lit a candle. I glanced quickly round and could see no one but ourselves. The most noticeable
thing in the room was the big white object. I recognised the shape well enough this time. It was a large
coffin-shaped casket, open on the floor beside it lay its lid, and it was doubtless this that I had tripped
over. Both were made of the same white material, like ice, but more cloudy and less shining.
"By Jove, I'm glad to see you," said Ransom, advancing and shaking hands with me. "I'd hoped to be
able to meet you at the station, but everything has had to be arranged in such a hurry and I found at the
last moment that I'd got to go up to Cambridge. I never intended to leave you to make that journey
alone." Then, seeing, I suppose, that I was still staring at him rather stupidly, he added, "I say-you're all
right, aren't you? You got through the barrage without any damage?" "The barrage?-I don't understand."
"I was thinking you would have met some difficulties in getting here."
"Oh, that" said I. "You mean it wasn't just my nerves? There really was something in the way?"
"Yes. They didn't want you to get here. I was afraid something of the sort might happen but there was no
time to do anything about it. I was pretty sure you'd get through somehow."
"By they you mean the others-our own eldila?" "Of course. They've got wind of what's on hand.. . ." I
interrupted him. "To tell you the truth. Ransom," I said, "I'm getting more worried every day about the
whole business. It came into my head as I was on my way here--"
"Oh, they'll put all sorts of things into your head if you let them," said Ransom lightly. "The best plan is
to take no notice and keep straight on. Don't try to answer them. They like drawing you into an
interminable argument."
"But, look here," said I. "This isn't child's play. Are you quite certain that this Dark Lord, this depraved
Oyarsa of Tellus, really exists? Do you know for certain either that there are two sides, or which side is
ours?"
He fixed me suddenly with one of his mild, but strangely formidable, glances.
"You are in real doubt about either, are you?" he asked.
"No," said I, after a pause, and felt rather ashamed.
"That's all right, then," said Ransom cheerfully. "Now let's get some supper and I'll explain as we go
along."
"What's that coffin affair?" I asked as we moved into the kitchen.
"That is what I'm to travel in."
"Ransom!" I exclaimed. "He-it-the eldil-is not going to take you back to Malacandra?"
"Don't!" said he. "Oh, Lewis, you don't understand. Take me back to Malacandra? If only he would! I'd
give anything I possess . . . just to look down one of those gorges again and see the blue, blue water
winding in and out among the woods. Or to be up on top-to see a Sorn go gliding along the slopes. Or to
be back there of an evening when Jupiter was rising, too bright to look at, and all the asteroids like a
Milky Way, with each star in it as bright as Venus looks from Earth! And the smells! It is hardly ever
out of my mind. You'd expect it to be worse at night when Malacandra is up and I can actually see it.
But it isn't then that I get the real twinge. It's on hot summer days-looking up at the deep blue and
thinking that in there, millions of miles deep where I can never, never get back to it, there's a place I
know, and flowers at that very moment growing over Meldilorn, and friends of mine, going about their
business, who would welcome me back. No. No such luck. It's not Malacandra I'm being sent to. It's
Perelandra."
"That's what we call Venus, isn't it?"
"Yes."
"And, you say you're being sent."
"Yes. If you remember, before I left Malacandra the Oyarsa hinted to me that my going there at all
might be the beginning of a whole new phase in the life of the Solar System-the Field of Arbol. It might
mean, he said, that the isolation of our world, the siege, was beginning to draw to an end." "Yes. I
remember."
"Well, it really does look as if something of the sort were afoot. For one thing, the two sides, as you call
them, have begun to appear much more clearly, much less mixed, here on Earth, in our own human
affairs-to show in something a little more like their true colours." "I see that all right."
"The other thing is this. The black archon-our own bent Oyarsa-is meditating some sort of attack on
Perelandra."
"But is he at large like that in the Solar System? Can he get there?"
"That's just the point. He can't get there in his own person, in his own photosome or whatever we should
call it. As you know, he was driven back within these bounds centuries before any human life existed on
our planet. If he ventured to show himself outside the Moon's orbit he'd be driven back again- by main
force. That would be a different kind of war. You or I could contribute no more to it than a flea could
contribute to the defence of Moscow. No. He must be attempting Perelandra in some different way."
"And where do you come in?" "Well-simply I've been ordered there." "By the-by Oyarsa, you mean?"
"No. The order comes from much higher up. They all do, you know, in the long run."
"And what have you got to do when you get there?" "I haven't been told."
"You are just part of the Oyarsa's entourage?" "Oh no. He isn't going to be there. He is to transport me to
Venus-to deliver me there. After that, as far as I know, I shall be alone."
"But, look here. Ransom-I mean..." my voice trailed away.
"I know!" said he with one of his singulariy disarming smiles. "You are feeling the absurdity of it. Dr
Elwin Ransom setting out single-handed to combat powers and principalities. You may even be
wondering if I've got megalomania" .. I didn't mean that quite," said I.
"Oh, but I think you did. At any rate that is what I have been feeling myself ever since the thing was
sprung on me. But when you come to think of it, is it odder than what all of us have to do every day?
When the Bible used that very expression about fighting with principalities and powers and depraved
hypersomatic beings at great heights (our translation is very misleading at that point, by the way) it
meant that quite ordinary people were to do the fighting. "Oh, I dare say," said I. "But that's rather
different. That refers to a moral conflict."
Ransom threw back his head and laughed. "Oh, Lewis, Lewis," he said, "you are inimitable, simply
inimitable!" "Say what you like. Ransom, there is a difference." "Yes. There is. But not a difference that
makes it megalomania to think that any of us might have to fight either way. I'll tell you how I look at it.
Haven't you noticed how in our own little war here on earth, there are different phases, and while any
one phase is going on people get into the habit of thinking and behaving as if it was going to be
permanent? But really the thing is changing under your hands all the time, and neither your assets nor
your dangers this year are the same as the year before. Now your idea that ordinary people will never
have to meet the Dark Eldila in any form except a psychological or moral form-as temptations or the
like-is simply an idea that held good for a certain phase of the cosmic war: the phase of the great siege,
the phase which gave to our planet its name of Thulcandra, the silent planet. But supposing that phase is
passing? In the next phase it may be anyone's job to meet them . . . well, in some quite different mode."
"I see."
"Don't imagine I've been selected to go to Perelandra because I'm anyone in particular. One never can
see, or not till long afterwards, why any one was selected for any job. And when one does, it is usually
some reason that leaves no room for vanity. Certainly, it is never for what the man himself would have
regarded as his chief qualifications. I rather fancy I am being sent because those two blackguards who
kidnapped me and took me to Malacandra, did something which they never intended: namely, gave a
human being a chance to learn that language." "What language do you mean?"
"Hressa-Hlab, of course. The language I learned in Malacandra."
"But surely you don't imagine they will speak the same language on Venus?"
"Didn't I tell you about that?" said Ransom, leaning forward. We were now at table and had nearly
finished our cold meat and beer and tea. "I'm surprised I didn't, for I found out two or three months ago,
and scientifically it is one of the most interesting things about the whole affair. It appears we were quite
mistaken in thinking Hressa-Hlab the peculiar speech of Mars. It is really what may be called Old Solar,
HIab-Eribol-ef-Cordt." "What on earth do you mean?"
"I mean that there was originally a common speech for all rational creatures inhabiting the planets of our
system: those that were ever inhabited, I mean-what the eldils call the Low Worlds. Most of them, of
course, have never been inhabited and never will be. At least not what we'd call inhabited. That original
speech was lost on Thulcandra, our own world, when our whole tragedy took place. No human language
now known in the world is descended from it."
"But what about the other two languages on Mars?"
"I admit I don't understand about them. One thing I do know, and I believe I could prove it on purely
philological grounds. They are incomparably less ancient than Hressa-Hlab, specially Surnibur, the
speech of the Sorns. I believe it could be shown that Surnibur is, by Malacandrian standards, quite a
modern development. I doubt if its birth can be put farther back than a date which would fall within our
Cambrian Period."
"And you think you will find Hressa-Hlab, or Old Solar, spoken on Venus?"
"Yes. I shall arrive knowing the language. It saves a lot of trouble-though, as a philologist, I find it
rather disappointing."
"But you've no idea what you are to do, or what conditions you will find?"
"No idea at all what I'm to do. There are jobs, you know, "where it is essential that one should not know
too much beforehand . . . things one might have to say which one couldn't say effectively if one had
prepared them. As to conditions, well, I don't know much. It will be warm: I'm to go naked. Our
astronomers don't know anything about the surface of Perelandra at all. The outer layer of her
atmosphere is too thick. The main problem, apparently, is whether she revolves on her own axis or not,
and at what speed. There are two schools of thought. There's a man called Schiaparelli who thinks she
revolves once on herself in the same time it takes her to go once round Arbol-I mean, the Sun. The other
people think she revolves on her own axis once in every twenty-three hours. That's one of the things I
shall find out."
"If Schiaparelli is right there'd be perpetual day on one side of her and perpetual night on the other?"
He nodded, musing. "It'd be a funny frontier," he said presently. "Just think of it. You'd come to a
country of eternal twilight, getting colder and darker every mile you went. And then presently you
wouldn't be able to go farther because there'd be no more air. I wonder can you stand in the day, just on
the right side of the frontier, and look into the night which you can never reach? And perhaps see a star
or two-the only place you could see them, for of course in the Day-Lands they would never be
visible. .. . Of course if they have a scientific civilisation they may have diving-suits or things like
submarines on wheels for going into the Night."
His eyes sparkled, and even I, who had been mainly thinking of how I should miss him and wondering
what chances there were of my ever seeing him again, felt a vicarious thrill of wonder and of longing to
know. Presently he spoke again. "You haven't yet asked me where you come in," he said. "Do you mean
I'm to go too?" said I, with a thrill of exactly the opposite kind.
"Not at all. I mean you are to pack me up, and to stand by to unpack me when I return-if all goes well."
"Pack you? Oh, I'd forgotten about that coffin affair. Ransom, how on earth are you going to travel in
that thing? What's the motive power? What about air-and food-and water? There's only just room for
you to lie in it."
"The Oyarsa of Malacandra himself will be the motive power. He will simply move it to Venus. Don't
ask me how. I have no idea what organs or instruments they use. But a creature who has kept a planet in
its orbit for several billions of years will be able to manage a packing-case!" "But what will you eat?
How will you breathe?" "He tells me I shall need to do neither. I shall be in some state of suspended
animation, as far as I can make out. I can't understand him when he tries to describe it. But that's his
affair."
"Do you feel quite happy about it?" said I, for a sort of horror was beginning once more to creep over me.
If you mean, does my reason accept the view that he will (accidents apart) deliver me safe on the surface
of Perelandra? "-the answer is Yes," said Ransom. "If you mean. Do my nerves and my imagination
respond to this view?-I'm afraid the answer is No. One can believe in anaesthetics and yet feel in a panic
when they actually put the mask over your face. I think I feel as a man who believes in the future life
feels when he is taken out to face a firing party. Perhaps it's good practice."
"And I'm to pack you into that accursed thing?" said I. "Yes," said Ransom. "That's the first step. We
must get out into the garden as soon as the sun is up and point it so that there are no trees or buildings in
the way. Across the cabbage bed will do. Then I get in-with a bandage across my eyes, for those walls
won't keep out all the sunlight once I'm beyond the air-and you screw me down. After that, I think you'll
just see it glide off." "And then?"
"Well, then comes the difficult part. You must hold yourself in readiness to come down here again the
moment you are summoned, to take off the lid and let me out when I return." "When do you expect to
return?"
"Nobody can say. Six months-a year-twenty years. That's the trouble. I'm afraid I'm laying a pretty
heavy burden on you." "I might be dead."
"I know. I'm afraid part of your burden is to select a successor : at once, too. There are four or five
people whom we can trust."
"What will the summons be?"
"Oyarsa will give it. It won't be mistakable for anything else. You needn't bother about that side of it.
One other point. I've no particular reason to suppose I shall come back wounded. But just in case-if you
can find a doctor whom we can let into the secret, it might be just as well to bring him with you when
you come down to let me out." "Would Humphrey do?"
"The very man. And now for some more personal matters. I've had to leave you out of my will, and I'd
like you to know why."
"My dear chap, I never thought about your will till this moment."
"Of course not. But I'd like to have left you something. The reason I haven't, is this. I'm going to
disappear. It is possible I may not come back. It's just conceivable there might be" a murder trial, and if
so one can't be too careful. I mean, for your sake. And now for one or two other private arrangements."
We laid our heads together and for a long time we talked about those matters which one usually
discusses with relatives and not with friends. I got to know a lot more about Ransom than I had known
before, and from the number of odd people whom he recommended to my care, 'If ever I happened to be
able to do anything', I came to realise the extent and intimacy of his charities. With every sentence the
shadow of approaching separation and a kind of graveyard gloom began to settle more emphatically
upon us. I found myself noticing and loving all sorts of little mannerisms and expressions in him such as
we notice always in a woman we love, but notice in a man only as the last hours of his leave run out or
the date of the probably fatal operation draws near. I felt our nature's incurable incredulity; and could
hardly believe that what was now so close, so tangible and (in a sense) so much at my command, would
in a few hours be wholly inaccessible, an image-soon, even an elusive image-in my memory. And finally
a sort of shyness fell between us because each knew what the other was feeling. It had got very cold.
"We must be going soon," said Ransom. "Not till he-the Oyarsa-comes back," said I-though, indeed,
now that the thing was so near I wished it to be over.
"He has never left us," said Ransom, "he has been in the cottage all the time."
"You mean he has been waiting in the next room all these hours?"
"Not waiting. They never have that experience. You and I are conscious of waiting, because we have a
body that grows tired or restless, and therefore a sense of cumulative duration. Also we can distinguish
duties and spare time and therefore have a conception of leisure. It is not like that with him. He has been
here all this time, but you can no more call it waiting than you can call the whole of his existence
waiting. You might as well say that a tree in a wood was waiting, or the sunlight waiting on the side of a
hill." Ransom yawned. "I'm tired," he said, "and so are you. I shall sleep well in that coffin of mine.
Come. Let us lug it out."
We went into the next room and I was made to stand before the featureless flame which did not wait but
just was, and there, with Ransom as our interpreter, I was in some fashion presented and with my own
tongue sworn in to this great business. Then we took down the blackout and let in the grey, comfortless
morning. Between us we carried out the casket and the lid, so cold they seemed to burn our fingers.
There was a heavy dew on the grass and my feet were soaked through at once.' The eldil was with us,
outside there, on the little lawn; hardly visible to my eyes at all in the daylight. Ransom showed me the
clasps of the lid and how it was to be fastened on, and then there was some miserable hanging about, and
then the final moment when he went back into the house and reappeared, naked; a tall, white, shivering,
weary scarecrow of a man at that pale, raw hour. When he had got into the hideous box he made me tie a
thick black bandage round his eyes and head. Then he lay down. I had no thoughts of the planet Venus
now and no real belief that I should see him again. If I had dared I would have gone back on the whole
scheme: but the other thing-the creature that did not wait-was there, and the fear of it was upon me. With
feelings that have since often returned to me in nightmare I fastened the cold lid down on top of the
living man and stood back. Next moment I was alone. I didn't see how it went. I went back indoors and
was sick. A few hours later I shut up the cottage and returned to Oxford.
Then the months went past and grew to a year and a little more than a year, and we had raids and bad
news and hopes deferred and all the earth became full of darkness and cruel habitations, till the night
when Oyarsa came to me again. After that there was a journey in haste for Humphrey and me, standings
in crowded corridors and waitings at small hours on windy platforms, and finally the moment when we
stood in clear early sunlight in the little wilderness of deep weeds which Ransom's garden had now
become and saw a black speck against the sunrise and then, almost silently, the casket had glided down
between us. We flung ourselves upon it and had the lid off in about a minute and a half.
"Good God! All smashed to bits," I cried at my first glance of the interior.
"Wait a moment," said Humphrey. And as he spoke the figure in the coffin began to stir and then sat up,
shaking off as it did so a mass of red things which had covered its head and shoulders and which I had
momentarily mistaken for ruin and blood. As they streamed off him and were caught in the wind I
perceived them to be flowers. He blinked for a second or so, then called us by our names, gave each of
us a hand, and stepped out on the grass.
"How are you both?" he said. "You're looking rather knocked up."
I was silent for a moment, astonished at the form which had risen from that narrow house-almost a new
Ransom, glowing with health and rounded with muscle and seemingly ten years younger. In the old days
he had been beginning to show a few grey hairs; but now the beard which swept his chest was pure gold.
"Hullo, you've cut your foot," said Humphrey: and I saw now that Ransom was bleeding from the heel.
"Ugh, it's cold down here," said Ransom. "I hope you've got the boiler going and some hot water-and
some clothes."
"Yes," said I, as we followed him into the house. "Humphrey thought of all that. I'm afraid I shouldn't
have."
Ransom was now in the bathroom, with the door open, veiled in clouds of steam, and Humphrey and I
were talking to him from the landing. Our questions were more numerous than he could answer.
"That idea of Schiaparelli's is all wrong," he shouted. "They have an ordinary day and night there," and
"No, my heel doesn't hurt-or, at least, it's only just begun to," and "Thanks, any old clothes. Leave them
on the chair," and "No, thanks. I don't somehow feel like bacon or eggs or anything of that kind. No
fruit, you say? Oh well, no matter. Bread or porridge or something," and "I'll be down in five minutes
now."
He kept on asking if we were really all right and seemed to think we looked ill. I went down to get the
breakfast, and Humphrey said he would stay and examine and dress the cut on Ransom's heel. When he
rejoined me I was looking at one of the red petals which had come in the casket.
"That's rather a beautiful flower," said I, handing it to him.
"Yes," said Humphrey, studying it with the hands and eyes of a scientist. "What extraordinary delicacy!
It makes an English violet seem like a coarse weed."
"Let's put some of them in water."
"Not much good. Look-it's withered already."
"How do you think he is?"
"Tip-top in general. But I don't quite like that heel. He says the haemorrhage has been going on for a
long time."
Ransom joined us, fully dressed, and I poured out the tea. And all that day and far into the night he told
us the story that follows.
WHAT it is like to travel in a celestial coffin was a thing that Ransom never described. He said he
couldn't. But odd hints about that journey have come out at one time or another when he was talking of
quite different matters.
According to his own account he was not what we call conscious, and yet at the same time the
experience was a very positive one with a quality of its own. On one occasion, someone had been
talking about 'seeing life' in the popular sense of knocking about the world and getting to know people,
and B., who was present (and who is an Anthroposophist), said something I can't quite remember about
'seeing life' in a very different sense. I think he was referring to some system of meditation which
claimed to make 'the form of Life itself' visible to the inner eye. At any rate Ransom let himself in for a
long cross-examination by failing to conceal the fact that he attached some very definite idea to this. He
even went so far- under extreme pressure-as to say that life appeared to him, in that condition, as a
'coloured shape'. Asked 'what colour?', he gave a curious look and could only say 'what colours! yes,
what colours!' But then he spoiled it all by adding, 'of course it wasn't colour at all really. I mean, not
what we'd call colour,' and shutting up completely for the rest of the evening. Another hint came out
when a sceptical friend of ours called McPhee was arguing against the Christian doctrine of the
resurrection of the human body. I was his victim at the moment, and he was pressing on me in his Scots
way with such questions as "So you think you're going to have guts and palate for ever in a world where
there'll be no eating, and genital organs in a world without copulation? Man, ye'll have a grand time of
it!" when Ransom suddenly burst out with great excitement, "Oh, don't you see, you ass, that there's a
difference between a trans-sensuous life and a non-sensuous life?" That, of course, directed McPhee's
fire to him. What emerged was that in Ransom's opinion the present functions and appetites of the body
would disappear, not because they were atrophied but because they were, as he said 'engulfed'. He used
the word 'trans-sexual', I remember, and began to hunt about for some similar words to apply to eating
(after rejecting 'trans-gastro-nomic'), and since he was not the only philologist present, that diverted the
conversation into different channels. But I am pretty sure he was thinking of something he had
experienced on his voyage to Venus. But perhaps the most mysterious thing he ever said about it was
this. I was questioning him on the subject-which he doesn't often allow-and had incautiously said, "Of
course I realise it's all rather too vague for you to put into words," when he took me up rather sharply,
for such a patient man, by saying, "On the contrary, it is words that are vague. The reason why the thing
can't be expressed is that it's too definite for language." And that is about all I can tell you of his journey.
One thing is certain, that he came back from Venus even more changed than he had come back from
Mars. But of course that may have been because of what happened to him after his landing.
To that landing, as Ransom narrated it to me, I will now proceed. He seems to have been awakened (if
that is the right word) from his indescribable celestial state by the sensation of falling-in other words,
when he was near enough to Venus to feel Venus as something in the downward direction. The next
thing he noticed was that he was very warm on one side and very cold on the other, though neither
sensation was so extreme as to be really painful. Anyway, both were soon swallowed up in the
prodigious white light from below which began to penetrate through the semi-opaque walls of the
casket. This steadily increased and became distressing in spite of the fact that his eyes were protected.
There is no doubt this was the albedo, the outer veil of very dense atmosphere with which Venus is
surrounded and which reflects the sun's rays with intense power. For some obscure reason he was not
conscious, as he had been on his approach to Mars, of his own rapidly increasing weight. When the
white light was just about to become unbearable, it disappeared altogether, and very soon after the cold
on his left side and the heat on his right began to decrease and to be replaced by an equable warmth. I
take it he was now in the outer layer of the Perelandrian atmosphere- at first in a pale, and later in a
tinted, twilight. The prevailing colour, as far as he could see through the sides of the casket, was golden
or coppery. By this time he must have been very near the surface of the planet, with the length of the
casket at right angles to that surface-falling feet downwards like a man in a lift. The sensation of fallinghelpless
as he was and unable to move his arms-became frightening. Then suddenly there came a great
green darkness, an unidentifiable noise-the first message from the new world-and a marked drop in
temperature. He seemed now to have assumed a horizontal position and also, to his great surprise, to be
moving not downwards but upwards, though, at the moment, he judged this to be an illusion. All this
time he must have been making faint, unconscious efforts to move his limbs, for now he suddenly found
that the sides of his prison-house yielded to pressure. He was moving his limbs, encumbered with some
viscous substance. Where was the casket? His sensations were very confused. Sometimes he seemed to
be falling, sometimes to be soaring upwards, and then again to be moving in the horizontal plane. The
viscous substance was white. There seemed to be less of it every moment.. . white, cloudy stuff just like
the casket, only not solid. With a horrible shock he realised that it was the casket, the casket melting,
dissolving away, giving place to an indescribable confusion of colour-a rich, varied world in which
nothing, for the moment, seemed palpable. There was no casket now. He was turned out - depositedsolitary.
He was in Perelandra.
His first impression was of nothing more definite than of something slanted-as though he were looking
at a photograph which had been taken when the camera was not 'held level. And even this lasted only for
an instant. The slant was replaced by a different slant, then two slants rushed together and made a peak,
and the peak flattened suddenly into a horizontal line, and the horizontal line tilted and became the edge
of a vast gleaming slope which rushed furiously towards him. At the same moment he felt that he was
being lifted. Up and up he soared till it seemed as if he must reach the burning dome of gold that hung
above him instead of a sky. Then he was at a summit; but almost before his glance had taken in a huge
valley that yawned beneath him-shining green like glass and marbled with streaks of scummy white-he
was rushing down into that valley at perhaps thirty miles an hour. And now he realised that there was a
delicious coolness over every part of him except his head, that his feet rested on nothing, and that he had
for some time been performing unconsciously the actions of a swimmer. He was riding the foamless
swell of an ocean, fresh and cool after the fierce temperatures of Heaven, but warm by earthly standardsas
warm as a shallow bay with sandy bottom in a sub-tropical climate. As he rushed smoothly up the
great convex hillside of the next wave he got a mouthful of the water. It was hardly at all flavoured with
salt; it was drinkable-like fresh water and only, by an infinitesimal degree, less insipid. Though he had
not been aware of thirst till now, his drink gave him a quite astonishing pleasure. It was almost like
meeting Pleasure itself for the first time. He buried his flushed face in the green translucence, and when
he withdrew it, found himself once more on the top of a wave.
There was no land in sight. The sky was pure, flat gold like the background of a medieval picture. It
looked very distant- as far off as a cirrus cloud looks from earth. The ocean was gold too, in the offing,
flecked with innumerable shadows. The nearer waves, though golden where their summits caught the
light, were green on their slopes: first emerald, and lower down a lustrous bottle green, deepening to
blue where they passed beneath the shadow of other waves.
All this he saw in a flash; then he was speeding down once more into the trough. He had somehow
turned on his back. He saw the golden roof of that world quivering with a rapid variation of paler lights
as a ceiling quivers at the reflected sunlight from the bath-water when you step into your bath on a
summer morning. He guessed that this was the reflection of the waves wherein he swam. It is a
phenomenon observable three days out of five in the planet of love. The queen of those seas views
herself continually in a celestial mirror.
Up again to the crest, and still no sight of land. Something that looked like clouds-or could it be ships?-
far away on his left. Then, down, down, down-he thought he would never reach the end of it... this time
he noticed how dim the light was. Such tepid revelry in water-such glorious bathing, as one would have
called it on earth, suggested as its natural accompaniment a blazing sun. But here there was no such
thing. The water gleamed, the sky burned with gold, but all was rich and dim, and his eyes fed upon it
undazzled and un-aching. The very names of green and gold, which he used perforce in describing the
scene, are too harsh for the tenderness, the muted iridescence, of that warm, maternal, delicately
gorgeous world. It was mild to look upon as evening, warm like summer noon, gentle and winning like
early dawn. It was altogether pleasurable. He sighed. There was a wave ahead of him now so high that it
was dreadful. We speak idly in our own world of seas mountain high when they are not much more than
mast high. But this was the real thing. If the huge shape had been a hill of land and not of water he might
have spent a whole forenoon or longer walking the slope before he reached the summit. It gathered him
into itself and hurled him up to that elevation in a matter of seconds. But before he reached the top, he
almost cried out in terror. For this wave had not a smooth top like the others. A horrible crest appeared;
jagged and billowy and fantastic shapes, unnatural, even unliquid, in appearance, sprouted from the
ridge. Rocks? Foam? Beasts? The question hardly had time to flash through his mind before the thing
was upon him. Involuntarily he shut his eyes. Then he found himself once more rushing downhill.
Whatever it was, it had gone past him. But it had been something. He had been struck in the face.
Dabbing with his hands he found no blood. He had been struck by something soft which did him no
harm but merely stung like a lash because of the speed at which he met it. He turned round on his back
again-already, as he did so, soaring thousands of feet aloft to the high water of the next ridge. Far below
him in a vast, momentary valley he saw the thing that had missed him. It was an irregularly shaped
object with many curves and re-entrants. It was variegated in colour like a patch-work quilt-flamecolour,
ultramarine, crimson, orange, gamboge, and violet. He could not say more about it for the whole
glimpse lasted so short a time. Whatever the thing was, it was floating, for it rushed up the slope of the
opposite wave and over the summit and out of sight. It sat to the water like a skin, curving as the water
curved. It took the wave's shape at the top, so that for a moment half of it was already out of sight
beyond the ridge and the other half still lying on the higher slope. It behaved rather like a mat of weeds
on a river-a mat of weeds that takes on every contour of the little ripples you make by rowing past it-but
on a very different scale. This thing might have been thirty acres or more in area.
Words are slow. You must not lose sight of the fact that his whole life on Venus up till now had lasted
less than five minutes. He was not in the least tired, and not yet seriously alarmed as to his power of
surviving in such a world. He had confidence in those who had sent him there, and for the mean-time the
coolness of the water and the freedom of his limbs were still a novelty and a delight; but more than all
these was something else at which I have already hinted and which can hardly be put into words-the
strange sense of excessive pleasure which seemed somehow to be communicated to him through all his
senses at once. I use the word 'excessive' because Ransom himself could only describe it by saying that
for his first few days on Perelandra he was haunted, not by a feeling of guilt, but by surprise that he had
no such feeling. There was an exuberance or prodigality of sweetness about the mere act of living which
our race finds it difficult not to associate with forbidden and extravagant actions. Yet it is a violent world
too. Hardly had he lost sight of the floating object when his eyes were stabbed by an unendurable light.
A grading, blue-to-violet illumination made the golden sky seem dark by comparison and in a moment
of time revealed more of the new planet than he had yet seen. He saw the waste of waves spread
illimitably before him, and far, far away, at the end of the world, against the sky, a single smooth
column of ghastly green standing up, the one thing fixed and vertical in this universe of shifting slopes.
Then the twilight rushed back (now seeming almost darkness) and he heard thunder. But it has a
different timbre from terrestrial thunder, more resonance, and even, when distant, a kind of tinkling. It is
the laugh, rather than the roar, of heaven. Another flash followed, and another, and then the storm was
all about him. Enormous purple clouds came driving between him and the golden sky, and with no
preliminary drops a rain such as he had never experienced began to fall. There were no lines in it; the
water above him 'seemed only less continuous than the sea, and he found it difficult to breathe. The
flashes were incessant. In between them, when he looked in any direction except that of the clouds, he
saw a completely changed world. It was like being at the centre of a rainbow, or in a cloud of multicoloured
steam. The water which now filled the air was turning sea and sky into a bedlam of flaming
and writhing transparencies. He was dazzled and now for the first time a little frightened. In the flashes
he saw, as before, only the endless sea and the still green column at the end of the world. No land
anywhere-not the suggestion of a shore from one horizon to the other.
The thunder was ear-splitting and it was difficult to get enough air. All sorts of things seemed to be
coming down in the rain-living things apparently. They looked like preter-naturally airy and graceful
frogs-sublimated frogs-and had the colour of dragon-flies, but he was in no plight to make careful
observations. He was beginning to feel the first symptoms of exhaustion and was completely confused
by the riot of colours in the atmosphere. How long this state of affairs lasted he could not say, but the
next thing that he remembers noticing with any accuracy was that the swell was decreasing. He got the
impression of being near the end of a range of water-mountains and looking down into lower country.
For a long time he never reached this lower country; what had seemed, by comparison with the seas
which he had met on his first arrival, to be calm water, always turned out to be only slightly smaller
waves when he rushed down into them. There seemed to be a good many of the big floating objects
about. And these, again, from some distance looked like an archipelago, but always, as he drew nearer
and found the roughness of the water they were riding, they became more like a fleet. But in the end
there was no doubt that the swell was subsiding. The rain stopped. The waves were merely of Atlantic
height. The rainbow colours grew fainter and more transparent and the golden sky first showed timidly
through them and then established itself again from horizon to horizon. The waves grew smaller still. He
began to breathe freely. But he was now really tired, and beginning to find leisure to be afraid.
One of the great patches of floating stuff was sidling down a wave not more than a few hundred yards
away. He eyed it eagerly, wondering whether he could climb on to one of these things for rest. He
strongly suspected that they would prove mere mats of weed, or the topmost branches of submarine
forests, incapable of supporting him. But while he thought this, the particular one on which his eyes
were fixed crept up a wave and came between him and the sky. It was not flat. From its tawny surface a
whole series of feathery and billowy shapes arose, very unequal in height; they looked darkish against
the dim glow of the golden roof. Then they all tilted one way as the thing which carried them curled over
the crown of the water and dipped out of sight. But here was another, not thirty yards away and bearing
down on him. He struck out' towards it, noticing as he did so how sore and feeble his arms were and
feeling his first thrill of true fear. As he approached it he saw that it ended in a fringe of undoubtedly
vegetable matter; it trailed, in fact, a dark red skirt of tubes and strings and bladders. He grabbed at them
and found he was not yet near enough. He began swimming desperately, for the tiling was gliding past
him at some ten miles an hour. He grabbed again and got a handful of whip-like red strings, but they
pulled out of his hand and almost cut him. Then he thrust himself right in among them, snatching wildly
straight before him. For one second he was in a kind of vegetable broth of gurgling tubes and exploding
bladders, next moment his hands caught something firmer ahead, something almost like very soft wood.
Then, with the breath nearly knocked out of him and a bruised knee, he found himself lying face
downward on a resistant surface. He pulled himself an inch or so farther. Yes-there was no doubt now,
one did not go through; it was something one could lie on.
It seems that he must have remained lying on his face, doing nothing and thinking nothing for a very
long time. When he next began to take any notice of his surroundings he was, at all events, well rested.
His first discovery was that he lay on a dry surface, which on examination turned out to consist of
something very like heather, except for the colour which was coppery. Burrowing idly with his fingers
he found something friable like dry soil, but very little of it, for almost at once he came upon a base of
tough interlocked fibres. Then he rolled on his back, and in doing so discovered the extreme resilience of
the surface on which he lay. It was something much more than the pliancy of the heather-like vegetation,
and felt more as if the whole floating island beneath that vegetation were a kind of mattress. He turned
and looked 'inland'-if that is the right word-and for one instant what he saw looked very like a country.
He was looking up a long lonely valley with a copper-coloured floor bordered on each side by gentle
slopes clothed in a kind of many-coloured forest. But even as he took this in, it became a long coppercoloured
ridge with the forest sloping down on each side of it. Of course he ought to have been prepared
for this, but he says that it gave him an almost sickening shock. The thing had looked, in that first
glance, so like a real country that he had forgotten it was floating-an island if you like, with hills and
valleys, but lulls and valleys which changed places every minute so that only a cinematograph could
make a contour map of it. And that is the nature of the floating islands of Perelandra. A photograph,
omitting the colours and the perpetual variation of shape, would make them look deceptively like
landscapes in our own world, but the reality is very different; for they are dry and fruitful like land but
their only shape is the inconstant shape of the water beneath them. Yet the land-like appearance proved
hard to resist. Although he had now grasped with his brain what was happening, Ransom had not yet
grasped it with his muscles and nerves. He rose to take a few paces inland-and downhill, as it was at the
moment of his rising-and immediately found himself flung down on his face, unhurt because of the
softness of the weed. He scrambled to his feet-saw that he now had a steep slope to ascend-and fell a
second time. A blessed relaxation of the strain in which he had been living since his arrival dissolved
him into weak laughter. He rolled to and fro on the soft fragrant surface in a real schoolboy fit of the
giggles.
This passed. And then for the next hour or two he was teaching himself to walk. It was much harder than
getting your sea-legs on a ship, for whatever the sea is doing the deck of the ship remains a plane. But
this was like learning to walk on water itself. It took him several hours to get a hundred yards away from
the edge, or coast, of the floating island; and he was proud when he could go five paces without a fall,
arms outstretched, knees bent in readiness for sudden change of balance, his whole body swaying and
tense like that of one who is learning to walk the tight-rope. Perhaps he would have learned more
quickly if his falls had not been so soft, if it had not been so pleasant, having fallen, to lie still and gaze
at the golden roof and hear the endless soothing noise of the water and breathe in the curiously delightful
smell of the herbage. And then, too, it was so strange, after rolling head over heels down into some little
dell, to open his eyes and find himself seated on the central mountain peak of the whole island looking
down like Robinson Crusoe on field and forest to the shores in every direction, that a man could hardly
help sitting there a few minutes longer-and then being detained again because, even as he made to rise,
mountain and valley alike had been obliterated and the whole island had become a level plain.
At long last he reached the wooded part. There was an undergrowth of feathery vegetation, about the
height of gooseberry bushes, coloured like sea anemones. Above this were the taller growths-strange
trees with tube-like trunks of grey and purple spreading rich canopies above his head, in which orange,
silver, and blue were the predominant colours. Here, with the aid of the tree trunks, he could keep his
feet more easily. The smells in the forest were beyond all that he had ever conceived. To say that they
made him feel hungry and thirsty would be misleading; almost, they created a new kind of hunger and
thirst, a longing that seemed to flow over from the body into the soul and which was a heaven to feel.
Again and again he stood still, clinging to some branch to steady himself, and breathed it all in, as if
breathing had become a kind of ritual. And at the same time the forest landscape furnished what would
have been a dozen landscapes on Earth-now level wood with trees as vertical as towers, now a deep
bottom where it was surprising not to find a stream, now a wood growing on a hillside, and now again, a
hilltop whence one looked down through slanted boles at the distant sea. Save for the inorganic sound of
waves there was utter silence about him. The sense of his solitude became intense without becoming at
all painful- only adding, as it were, a last touch of wildness to the unearthly pleasures that surrounded
him. If he had any fear now, it was a faint apprehension that his reason might be in danger. There was
something in Perelandra that might overload a human brain.
Now he had come to a part of the wood where great globes of yellow fruit hung from the trees-clustered
as toy-balloons are clustered on the back of the balloon-man and about the same size. He picked one of
them and turned it over and over. The rind was smooth and firm and seemed impossible to tear open.
Then by accident one of his fingers punctured it and went through into coldness. After a moment's
hesitation he put the ' little aperture to his lips. He had meant to extract the smallest, experimental sip,
but the first taste put his caution all to flight. It was, of course, a taste, just as his thirst and hunger had
been thirst and hunger. But then it was so different from every other taste that it seemed mere pedantry
to call it a taste at all. It was like the discovery of a totally new genus of pleasures, something unheard of
among men, out of all reckoning, beyond all covenant. For one draught of this on Earth wars would be
fought and nations betrayed. It could not be classified. He could never tell us, when he came back to the
world of men, whether it was sharp or sweet, savoury or voluptuous, creamy or piercing. 'Not like that'
was all he could ever say to such inquiries. As he let the empty gourd fall from his hand and was about
to pluck a second one, it came into his head that he was now neither hungry nor thirsty. And yet to
repeat a pleasure so intense and almost so spiritual seemed an obvious thing to do. His reason, or what
we commonly take to be reason in our own world, was all in favour of tasting this miracle again; the
child-like innocence of fruit, the labours he had undergone, the uncertainty of the future, all seemed to
commend the action. Yet something seemed opposed to this 'reason'. It is difficult to suppose that this
opposition came from desire, for what desire would turn from so much deliciousness? But for whatever
cause, it appeared to him better not to taste again. Perhaps the experience had been so complete that
repetition would be a vulgarity-like asking to hear the same symphony twice in a day.
As he stood pondering over this and wondering how often in his life on Earth he had reiterated pleasures
not through desire, but in the teeth of desire and in obedience to a spurious rationalism, he noticed that
the light was changing. It was darker behind him than it had been; ahead, the sky and sea shone through
the wood with a changed intensity. To step out of the forest would have been a minute's work on Earth;
on this undulating island it took him longer, and when he finally emerged into the open an extraordinary
spectacle met his eyes. All day there had been no variation at any point in the golden roof to mark the
sun's position, but now the whole of one half-heaven revealed it. The orb itself remained invisible, but
on the rim of the sea rested an arc of green so luminous that he could not look at it, and beyond that,
spreading almost to the zenith, a great fan of colour like a peacock's tail. Looking over his shoulder he
saw the whole island ablaze with blue, and across it and beyond it, even to the ends of the world, his
own enormous shadow. The sea, far calmer now than he had yet seen it, smoked towards heaven in huge
dolomites and elephants of blue and purple vapour, and a light wind, full of sweetness, lifted the hair on
his forehead. The day was burning to death. Each moment the waters grew more level; something not far
removed from silence began to be felt. He sat down cross-legged on the edge of the island, the desolate
lord, it seemed, of this solemnity. For the first time it crossed his mind that he might have been sent to
an uninhabited world, and the terror added, as it were, a razor-edge to all that profusion of pleasure.
Once more, a phenomenon which reason might have anticipated took him by surprise. To be naked yet
warm, to wander among summer fruits and lie in sweet heather-all this had led him to count on a twilit
night, a mild midsummer greyness. But before the great apocalyptic colours had died out in the west, the
eastern heaven was black. A few moments, and the blackness had reached the western horizon. A little
reddish light lingered at the zenith for a time, during which he crawled back to the woods. It was
already, in common parlance, 'too dark to see your way'. But before he had lain down among the trees
the real night had come-seamless darkness, not like night but like being in a coal-cellar, darkness in
which his own hand held before his face was totally invisible. Absolute blackness, the undimensioned,
the impenetrable, pressed on his eyeballs. There is no moon in that land, no star pierces the golden roof.
But the darkness was warm. Sweet new scents came stealing out of it. The world had no size now. Its
boundaries were the length and breadth of his own body and the little patch of soft fragrance which
made his hammock, swaying ever more and more gently. Night covered him like a blanket and kept all
loneliness from him. The blackness might have been his own room. Sleep came like a fruit which falls
into the hand almost before you have touched the stem.
AT Ransom's waking something happened to him which perhaps never happens to a man until he is out
of his own world: he saw reality, and thought it was a dream. He opened his eyes and saw a strange
heraldically coloured tree loaded with yellow fruits and silver leaves. Round the base of the indigo stem
was coiled a small dragon covered with scales of red gold. He recognised the garden of the Hesperides at
once. 'This is the most vivid dream I have ever had,' he thought. By some means or other he then
realised that he was awake; but extreme comfort and some trance-like quality, both in the sleep which
had just left him and in the experience to which he had awaked, kept him lying motionless. He
remembered how in the very different world called Malacandra-that cold, archaic world, as it now
seemed to him-he had met the original of the Cyclops, a giant in a cave and a shepherd. Were all the
things which appeared as mythology on Earth scattered through other worlds as realities? Then the
realisation came to him: 'You are in an unknown planet, naked and alone, and that may be a dangerous
animal.' But he was not badly frightened. He knew that the ferocity of terrestrial animals was, by cosmic
standards, an exception, and had found kindness in stranger creatures than this. But he lay quiet a little
longer and looked at it. It was a creature of the lizard type, about the size of a St Bernard dog, with a
serrated back. Its eyes were open.
Presently he ventured to rise on one elbow. The creature went on looking at him. He noticed that the
island was perfectly level. He sat up and saw, between the stems of the trees, that they were in calm
water. The sea looked like gilded glass. He resumed his study of the dragon. Could this be a rational
animal-a hnau as they said in Malacandra-and the very thing he had been sent there to meet? It did not
look like one, but it was worth trying. Speaking in the Old Solar tongue he formed his first sentence-and
his own voice sounded to him unfamiliar.
"Stranger," he said, "I have been sent to your world through the Heaven by the servants of Maleldil. Do
you give me welcome?" The thing looked at him very hard and perhaps very wisely. Then, for the first
time, it shut its eyes. This seemed an unpromising start. Ransom decided to rise to his feet. The dragon
reopened its eyes. He stood looking at it while you could count twenty, very uncertain how to proceed.
Then he saw that it was beginning to uncoil itself. By a great effort of will he stood his ground; whether
the thing were rational or irrational, flight could hardly help him for long. It detached itself from the tree,
gave itself a shake, and opened two shining reptilian wings-bluish gold and bat-like. When it had shaken
these and closed them again, it gave Ransom another long stare, and at last, half waddling and half
crawling, made its way to the edge of the island and buried its long metallic-looking snout in the water.
When it had drunk it raised its head and gave a kind of croaking bleat which was not entirely unmusical.
Then it turned, looked yet again at Ransom and finally approached him. 'It's madness to wait for it,' said
the false reason, but Ransom set his teeth and stood. It came right up and began. nudging him with its
cold snout about his knees. He was in great perplexity. Was it rational and was this how it talked? Was it
irrational but friendly-and if so, how should he respond? You could hardly stroke a creature with scales!
Or was it merely scratching itself against him? At that moment, with - a suddenness which convinced
him it was only a beast, it seemed to forget all about him, turned away, and began tearing up the herbage
with great avidity. Feeling that honour was now satisfied, he also turned away back to the woods.
There were trees near him loaded with the fruit which he had already tasted, but his attention was
diverted by a strange ^appearance a little farther off. Amid the darker foliage of a greenish-grey thicket
something seemed to be sparkling. The impression, caught out of the corner of his eye, had been that of
a greenhouse roof with the sun on it. Now that he looked at it squarely it still suggested glass, but glass
in perpetual motion. Light seemed to be coming and going in a spasmodic fashion. Just as he was
moving to investigate this phenomenon he was startled by a touch on his left leg. The beast had followed
him. It was once more nosing and nudging. Ransom quickened his pace. So did the dragon. He stopped;
so did it. When he went on again it accompanied him so closely that its side pressed against his thighs
and sometimes its cold, hard, heavy foot descended on his. The arrangement was so little to his
satisfaction that he was beginning to wonder seriously how he could put an end to it when suddenly his
whole attention was attracted by something else. Over his head there hung from a hairy tube-like branch
a great spherical object, almost transparent, and shining. It held an area of reflected light in it and at one
place a suggestion of rainbow colouring. So this was the explanation of the glass-like appearance in the
wood. And looking round he perceived innumerable shimmering globes of the same kind in every
direction. He began to examine the nearest one attentively. At first he thought it was moving, then he
thought it was not. Moved by a natural impulse he put out his hand to touch it. Immediately his head,
face, and shoulders were drenched with what seemed (in that warm world) an ice-cold shower bath, and
his nostrils filled with a sharp, shrill, exquisite scent that somehow brought to his mind the verse in
Pope, 'die of a rose in aromatic pain'. Such was the refreshment that he seemed to himself to have been,
till now, but half awake. When he opened his eyes- which had closed involuntarily at the shock of
moisture-all the colours about him seemed richer and the dimness of that world seemed clarified. A reenchantment
fell upon him. The golden beast at his side seemed no longer either a danger or a nuisance.
If a naked man and a wise dragon were indeed the sole inhabitants of this floating paradise, then this
also was fitting, for at that moment he had a sensation not of following an adventure but of enacting a
myth. To be the figure that he was in this unearthly pattern appeared sufficient.
He turned again to the tree. The thing that had drenched him was quite vanished. The tube or branch,
deprived of its pendent globe, now ended in a little quivering orifice from which there hung a bead of
crystal moisture. He looked round in some bewilderment. The grove was still full of its iridescent fruit
but now he perceived that there was a slow continual movement. A second later he had mastered the
phenomenon. Each of the bright spheres was very gradually increasing in size, and each, on reaching a
certain dimension, vanished with a faint noise, and in its place there was a momentary dampness on the
soil and a soon-fading, delicious fragrance and coldness in the air. In fact, the things were not fruit at all
but bubbles. The trees (he christened them at that moment) were bubble trees. Their life, apparently,
consisted in drawing up water from the ocean and then expelling it in this form, but enriched by its short
sojourn in their sappy inwards. He sat down to feed his eyes upon the spectacle. Now that he knew the
secret he could explain to himself why this wood looked and felt so different from every other part of the
island. Each bubble, looked at individually, could be seen to emerge from its parent-branch as a mere
bead, the size of a pea, and swell and burst; but looking at the wood as a whole, one was conscious only
of a continual faint disturbance of light, an elusive interference with the prevailing Perelandrian silence,
an unusual coolness in the air, and a fresher quality in the perfume. To a man born in our world it felt a
more outdoor place than the open parts of the island, or even the sea. Looking at a fine duster of the
bubbles which hung above his head he thought how easy it would be to get up and plunge oneself
through the whole lot of them and to feel, all at once, that magical refreshment multiplied tenfold. But he
was restrained by the same sort of feeling which had restrained him over-night from tasting a second
gourd. He had always disliked the people who encored a favourite air in an opera-'That just spoils it' had
been his comment. But this now appeared to him as a principle of far wider application and deeper
moment. This itch to have things over again, as if life were a mm that could be unrolled twice or even
made to work backwards . . . was it possibly the root of all evil? No: of course the love of money was
called that. But money itself-perhaps one valued it chiefly as a defence against chance, a security for
being able to have things over again, a means of arresting the unrolling of the film.
He was startled from his meditation by the physical discomfort of some weight on his knees. The dragon
had lain down and deposited its long, heavy head. across them. "Do you know," he said to it in English,
"that you are a considerable nuisance?" It never moved. He decided that he had better try and make
friends with it. He stroked the hard dry head, but the creature took no notice. Then his hand passed lower
down and found softer surface, or even a chink in the mail. Ah . . . that was where it liked being tickled.
It grunted and shot out a long cylindrical slate-coloured tongue to lick him. It rolled round on its back
revealing an almost white belly, which Ransom kneaded with his toes. His acquaintance with the dragon
prospered exceedingly. In the end it went to sleep.
He rose and got a second shower from a bubble tree. This made him feel so fresh and alert that he began
to think of food. He had forgotten whereabouts on the island the yellow gourds were to be found, and as
he set out to look for them he discovered that it was difficult to walk. For a moment he wondered
whether the liquid in the bubbles had some intoxicating quality, but a glance around assured him of the
real reason. The plain of copper-coloured heather before him, even as he watched, swelled into a low hill
and the low hill moved in his direction. Spellbound anew at the sight of land rolling towards him, like
water, in a wave, he forgot to adjust himself to the movement and lost his feet. Picking himself up, he
proceeded more carefully. This time there was no doubt about it. The sea was rising. Where two
neighbouring woods made a vista to the edge of this living raft he could see troubled water, and the
warm wind was now strong enough to ruffle his hair. He made his way gingerly towards the coast, but
before he reached it he passed some bushes which carried a rich crop of oval green berries, about three
times the size of almonds. He picked one and broke it in two. The flesh was dryish and bread-like,
something of the same kind as a banana. It turned out to be good to eat. It did not give the orgiastic and
almost alarming pleasure of the gourds, but rather the specific pleasure of plain food-the delight of
munching and being nourished, a 'Sober certainty of waking bliss'. A man, or at least a man like
Ransom, felt he ought to say grace over it, and so he presently did. The gourds would have required
rather an oratorio or a mystical meditation. But the meal had its unexpected high lights. Every now and
then one struck a berry which had a bright red centre: and these were so savoury, so memorable among a
thousand tastes, that he would have begun to look for them and to feed on them only, but that he was
once more forbidden by that same inner adviser which had already spoken to him twice since he came to
Perelandra. 'Now on earth,' thought Ransom, 'they'd soon discover how to breed these redhearts, and
they'd cost a great deal more than the others.' Money, in fact, would provide the means of saying encore
in a voice that could not be disobeyed.
When he had finished his meal he went down to the water's edge to drink, but before he arrived there it
was already 'up' to the water's edge. The island at that moment was a little valley of bright land nestling
between hills of green water, and as he lay on his belly to drink he had the extraordinary experience of
dipping his mouth in a sea that was higher than the shore. Then he sat upright for a bit with his legs
dangling over the edge among the red weeds that fringed this little country. His solitude became a more
persistent element in his consciousness. What had he been brought here to do? A wild fancy came into
his head that this empty world had been waiting for him as for its first inhabitant, that he was singled out
to be the founder, the beginner. It was strange that the utter loneliness through all these hours had not
troubled him so much as one night of it on Malacandra. He thought the difference lay in this, that mere
chance, or what he took for chance, had turned him adrift in Mars, but here he knew that he was part of a
plan. He was no longer unattached, no longer on the outside.
As his country climbed the smooth mountains of dimly lustrous water he had frequent opportunity to see
that many other islands were close at hand. They varied from his own island and from one another in
their colouring more than he would have thought possible. It was a wonder to see these big mats or
carpets of land tossing all around him like yachts in harbour on a rough day-their trees each moment at a
different angle just as the masts of the yachts would be. It was a wonder to see some edge of vivid green
or velvety crimson come creeping over the top of a wave far above him and then wait till the whole
country unrolled itself down the wave's side for him to study. Sometimes his own land and a
neighbouring land would be on opposite slopes of a trough, with only a narrow strait of water between
them; and then, for the moment, you were cheated with the semblance of a terrestrial landscape. It
looked exactly as though you were in a well-wooded valley with a river at the bottom of it. But while
you watched, that seeming river did the impossible. It thrust itself up so that the land on either side
sloped downwards from it; and then up farther still and shouldered half the landscape out of sight
beyond its ridge; and became a huge greeny-gold hog's back of water hanging in the sky and threatening
to engulf your own land, which now was concave and reeled backwards to the next roller, and rushing
upwards, became convex again.
A clanging, whirring noise startled him. For a moment he fancied he was in Europe and that a plane was
flying low over his head. Then he recognised his friend the dragon. Its tail was streaked out straight
behind it so that it looked like a flying worm, and it was heading for an island about half a mile away.
Following its course with his eyes, he saw two long lines of winged objects, dark against the gold
firmament, approaching the same island from the left and right. But they were not bat-winged reptiles.
Peering hard into the distance, he decided that they were birds, and a musical chattering noise, presently
wafted to him by a change of the wind, confirmed this belief. They must have been a little larger than
swans. Their steady approach to the same island for which the dragon was heading fixed his attention
and filled him with a vague feeling of expectation. What followed next raised this to positive
excitement. He became aware of some creamily foamed disturbance in the water, much nearer, and
making for the same island. A whole fleet of objects was moving in formation. He rose to his feet. Then
the lift of a wave cut them off from his sight. Next moment they were visible again, hundreds of feet
below him. Silver-coloured objects, all alive with circling and frisking movements ... he lost them again,
and swore. In such a very uneventful world they had become important. Ah . . . ! here they were again.
Fish certainly. Very large, obese, dolphin-like fish, two long lines together, some of them spouting
columns of rainbow-coloured water from their noses, and one leader. There was something queer about
the leader, some sort of projection or malformation on the back. If only the things would remain visible
for more than fifty seconds at a time! They had almost reached that other island now, and the birds were
all descending to meet them at its edge. There was the leader again, with his hump or pillar on his back.
A moment of wild incredulity followed, and then Ransom was balanced, with legs wide apart, on the
utmost fringe of his own island and shouting for all he was worth. For at the very moment when the
leading fish had reached that neighbouring land, the land had risen up on a wave between him and the
sky; and he had seen, in perfect and unmistakable silhouette, the thing on the fish's back reveal itself as a
human form-a human form which stepped ashore, turned with a slight inclination of its body towards the
fish and then vanished from sight as the whole island slid over the shoulder of the billow. With beating
heart Ransom waited till it was in view again. This time it was not between him and the sky. For a
second or so the human figure was undiscoverable. A stab of something like despair pierced him. Then
he picked it out again-a tiny darkish shape moving slowly between him and a patch of blue vegetation.
He waved and gesticulated and shouted till his throat was hoarse, but it took no notice of him. Every
now and then he lost sight of it. Even when he found it again, he sometimes doubted whether it were not
an optical illusion-some chance figuration of foliage which his intense desire had assimilated to the
shape of a man. But always, just before he had despaired, it would become unmistakable again. Then his
eyes began to grow tired and he knew that the longer he looked the less he would see. But he went on
looking none the less.
At last, from mere exhaustion, he sat down. The solitude, which up till now had been scarcely painful,
had become a horror. Any return to it was a possibility he dared not face, The drugging and entrancing
beauty had vanished from his surroundings; take that one human form away and all the rest of this world
was now pure nightmare, a horrible cell or trap in which he was imprisoned. The suspicion that he was
beginning to suffer from hallucinations crossed his mind. He had a picture of living for ever and ever on
this hideous island, always really alone but always haunted by the phantoms of human beings, who
would come up to him with smiles and outstretched hands, and then fade away as he approached them.
Bowing his head on his knees, he set his teeth and endeavoured to restore some order in his mind. At
first he found he was merely listening to his own breathing and counting the beats of his heart; but he
tried again and presently succeeded. And then, like revelation, came the very simple idea that if he
wished to attract the attention of this man-like creature he must wait till he was on the crest of a wave
and then stand up so that it would see him outlined against the sky.
Three times he waited till the shore whereon he stood became a ridge, and rose, swaying to the
movement of his strange country, gesticulating. The fourth time he succeeded. The neighbouring island
was, of course, lying for the moment beneath him like a valley. Quite unmistakably the small dark figure
waved, back. It detached itself from a confusing background of greenish vegetation and began running
towards him -that is, towards the nearer coast of its own island-across an orange-coloured field. It ran
easily: the heaving surface of the field did not seem to trouble it. Then his own land reeled downwards
and backwards and a great wall of water pushed its way up between the two countries and cut each off
from sight of the other. A moment later, and Ransom, from the valley in which he now stood, saw the
orange-coloured land pouring itself like a moving hillside down the slightly convex slope of a wave far
above him. The creature was still running. The width of water between the two islands was about thirty
feet, and the creature was less than a hundred yards away from him. He knew now that it was not merely
man-like, but a man-a green man on an orange field, green like the beautifully coloured green beetle in
an English garden, running downhill towards him with easy strides and very swiftly. Then the seas lifted
his own land and the green man became a foreshortened figure far below him, like an actor seen from
the gallery at Covent Garden. Ransom stood on the very brink of his island, straining his body forward
and shouting. The green man looked up. He was apparently shouting too, with his hands arched about
his mouth; but the roar of the seas smothered the noise and the next moment Ransom's island dropped
into the trough of the wave and the high green ridge of sea cut off his view. It was maddening. He was
tortured with the fear that the distance between the islands might be increasing. Thank God: here came
the orange land over the crest following him down into the pit. And there was the stranger, now on the
very shore, face to face with him. For one second the alien eyes looked at his full of love and welcome.
Then the whole face changed: a shock as of disappointment and astonishment passed over it. Ransom
realised, not without a disappointment of his own, that he had been mistaken for someone else. The
running, the waving, the shouts, had not been intended for him. And the green man was not a man at all,
but a woman.
It is difficult to say why this surprised him so. Granted the human form, he was presumably as likely to
meet a female as a male. But it did surprise him, so that only when the two islands once more began to
fall apart into separate wave-valleys did he realise that he had said nothing to her, but stood staring like a
fool. And now that she was out of sight he found his brain on fire with doubts. Was this what he had
been sent to meet? He had been expecting wonders, had been prepared for wonders, but not prepared for
a goddess carved apparently out of green stone, yet alive. And then it flashed across his mind- he had not
noticed it while the scene was before him-that she had been strangely accompanied. She had stood up
amidst a throng of beasts and birds as a tall sapling stands among bushes-big pigeon-coloured birds and
flame-coloured birds, and dragons, and beaver-like creatures about the size of rats, and heraldic-looking
fish in the sea at her feet. Or had he imagined that? Was this the beginning of the hallucinations he had
feared? Or another myth coming out into the world of fact-perhaps a more terrible myth, of Circe or
Alcina? And the expression on her face . . . what had she expected to find that made the finding of him
such a disappointment?
The other island became visible again. He had been right about the animals. They surrounded her ten or
twenty deep, all facing her, most of them motionless, but some of them finding their places, as at a
ceremony, with delicate noiseless movements. The birds were in long lines and more of them seemed to
be alighting on the island every moment and joining these lines. From a wood of bubble trees behind her
half a dozen creatures like very short-legged and elongated pigs-the dachshunds of the pig world-were
waddling up to join the assembly. Tiny frog-like beasts, like those he had seen falling in the rain, kept
leaping about her, sometimes higher than her head, sometimes alighting on her shoulders, their colours
were so vivid that at first he mistook them for kingfishers. Amidst all this she stood looking at him; her
feet together, her arms hanging at her sides, her stare level and unafraid, communicating nothing.
Ransom determined to speak, using the Old Solar tongue. "I am from another world," he began and then
stopped. The Green Lady had done something for which he was quite unprepared. She raised her arm
and pointed at him: not as in menace, but as though inviting the other creatures to behold him. At the
same moment her face changed again, and for a second he thought she was going to cry. Instead she
burst into laughter-peal upon peal of laughter till her whole body shook with it, till she bent almost
double, with her hands resting on her knees, still laughing and repeatedly pointing at him. The animals,
like our own dogs in similar circumstances, dimly understood that there was merriment afoot; all manner
of gambolling, wing-clapping, snorting, and standing upon hind legs began to be displayed. And still the
Green Lady laughed till yet again the wave divided them and she was out of sight.
Ransom was thunderstruck. Had the eldila sent him to meet an idiot? Or an evil spirit that mocked him?
Or was it after all a hallucination?-for this was just how a hallucination might be expected to behave.
Then an idea occurred to him which would have taken much longer, perhaps, to occur to me or you. It
might not be she who was mad but he who was ridiculous. He glanced down at himself. Certainly his
legs presented an odd spectacle, for one was brownish-red (like the flanks of a Titian satyr) and the other
was white-by comparison, almost a leprous white. As far as self-inspection could go, he had the same
parti-coloured appearance all over-no unnatural result of his one-sided exposure to the sun during the
voyage. Had this been the joke? He felt a momentary impatience with the creature who could mar the
meeting of two worlds with laughter at such a triviality. Then he smiled in spite of himself at the very
undistinguished career he was having on Perelandra. For dangers he had been prepared; but to be first a
disappointment and then an absurdity . . . Hullo! Here were the Lady and her island in sight again.
She had recovered from her laughter and sat with her legs trailing in the sea, half unconsciously
caressing a 'gazelle-like creature which had thrust its soft nose under her arm. It was difficult to believe
that she had ever laughed, ever done anything but sit on the shore of her floating isle. Never had Ransom
seen a face so calm, and so unearthly, despite the full humanity of every feature. He decided afterwards
that the unearthly quality was due to the complete absence of that element of resignation which mixes, in
however slight a degree, with all profound stillness in terrestrial faces. This was a calm which no storm
had ever preceded. It might be idiocy, it might be immortality, it might be some condition of mind to
which terrestrial experience offered no clue at all. A curious and rather horrifying sensation crept over
him. On the ancient planet Malacandra he had met creatures who were not even remotely human in form
but who had turned out, on further acquaintance, to be rational and friendly. Under an alien exterior he
had discovered a heart like his own. Was he now to have the reverse experience? For now he realised
that the word 'human' refers to something more than the bodily form or even to the rational mind. It
refers also to that community of blood and experience which unites all men and women on the Earth.
But this creature was not of his race; no windings, however intricate, of any genealogical tree could ever
establish a connection between himself and her. In that sense, not one drop in her veins was 'human'.
The universe had produced her species and his quite independently. All this passed through his mind
very quickly, and was speedily interrupted by his consciousness that the light was changing. At first he
thought that the green Creature had, of herself, begun to turn bluish and to shine with a strange electric
radiance. Then he noticed that the whole landscape was a blaze of blue and purple-and almost at the
same time that the two islands were not so close together as they had been. He glanced at the sky. The
many-coloured furnace of the short-lived evening was kindled all about him. In a few minutes it would
be pitch black . . . and the islands were drifting apart. Speaking slowly in that ancient language, he cried
out to her, "I am a stranger. I come in peace. Is it your will that I swim over to your land?"
The Green Lady looked quickly at him with an expression of curiosity.
"What is 'peace'?" she asked. Ransom could have danced with impatience. Already it was visibly darker
and there was no doubt now that the distance between the islands was increasing. Just as he was about to
speak again a wave rose between them and once more she was out of sight; and as that wave hung above
him, shining purple in the light of the sunset, he noticed how dark the sky beyond it had become. It was
already through a kind of twilight that he looked down from the next ridge upon the other island far
below him. He flung himself into the water. For some seconds he found a difficulty in getting clear of
the shore. Then he seemed to succeed and struck out. Almost at once he found himself back again
among the red weeds and bladders. A moment or two of violent struggling followed and then he was
free-and swimming steadily-and then, almost without warning, swimming in total darkness. He swam
on, but despair of finding the other land, or even of saving his life, now gripped him. The perpetual
change of the great swell abolished all sense of direction. It could only be by chance that he would land
anywhere. Indeed, he judged from the time he had already been in the water that he must have been
swimming along the space between the islands instead of across it. He tried to alter his course; then
doubted the wisdom of this, tried to return to his original course, and became so confused that he could
not be sure he had done either. He kept on telling himself that he must keep his head. He was beginning
to be tired. He gave up all attempts to guide himself. Suddenly, a long time after, he felt vegetation
sliding past him. He gripped and pulled. Delicious smells of fruit and flowers came to him out of the
darkness. He pulled harder still on his aching arms. Finally he found himself, safe and panting, on the
dry, sweet-scented, undulating surface of an island.
RANSOM must have fallen asleep almost as soon as he landed, for he remembered nothing more till
what seemed the song of a bird broke in upon his dreams. Opening his eyes, he saw that it was a bird
indeed, a long-legged bird like a very small stork, singing rather like a canary. Full daylight-or what
passes for such in Perelandra-was all about him, and in his heart such a premonition of good adventure
as made him sit up forthwith and brought him, a moment later, to his feet. He stretched his arms and
looked around. He was not on the orange-coloured island, but on the same island which had been his
home ever since he came to this planet. He was floating in a dead calm and therefore had no difficulty in
making his way to the shore. And there he stopped in astonishment. The Lady's island was floating
beside his, divided only by five feet or so of water. The whole look of the world had changed. There was
no expanse of sea now visible-only a flat wooded landscape as far as the eye could reach in every
direction. Some ten or twelve of the islands, in fact, were here lying together and making a short-lived
walking with her head a little bowed and her hands occupied in plaiting together some blue flowers. She
was singing to herself in a low voice but stopped and turned as he hailed her and looked him full in the
face.
"I was young yesterday," she began, but he did not hear the rest of her speech. The meeting, now that it
had actually come about, proved overwhelming. You must not misunderstand the story at this point.
What overwhelmed him was not in the least the fact that she, like himself, was totally naked.
Embarrassment and desire were both a thousand miles away from his experience: and if he was a little
ashamed of his own body, that was a shame which had nothing to do with difference of sex and turned
only on the fact that he knew his body to be a little ugly and a little ridiculous. Still less was her colour a
source of horror to him. In her own world that green was beautiful and fitting; it was his pasty white and
angry sunburn which were the monstrosity. It was neither of these; but he found himself unnerved. He
had to ask her presently to repeat what she had been saying.
"I was young yesterday," she said. "When I laughed at you. Now I know that the people in your world
do not like to be laughed at."
"You say you were young?"
"Yes."
"Are you not young today also?"
She appeared to be thinking for a few moments, so intently that the flowers dropped, unregarded, from
her hand.
"I see it now," she said presently. "It is very strange to say one is young at the moment one is speaking.
But tomorrow I shall be older. And then I shall say I was young today. You are quite right. This is great
wisdom you are bringing, 0 Piebald Man."
"What do you mean?"
"This looking backward and forward along the line and seeing how a day has one appearance as it comes
to you, and another when you are in it, and a third when it has gone past. Like the waves."
"But you are very little older than yesterday."
"How do you know that?"
"I mean," said Ransom, "a night is not a very long time."
She thought again, and then spoke, suddenly, her face lightening. "I see it now," she said. "You think
times have lengths. A night is always a night whatever you do in it, as from this tree to that is always so
many paces whether you take them quickly or slowly. I suppose that is true in a way. But the waves do
not always come at equal distances. I see that you come from a wise world ... if this is wise. I have never
done it before-stepping out of life into the Alongside and looking at oneself living as if one were not
alive. Do they all do that in your world. Piebald?"
"What do you know about other worlds?" said Ransom.
"I know this. Beyond the roof it is all deep heaven, the high place. And the low is not really spread out
as it seems to be" (here she indicated the whole landscape) "but is rolled up into little balls: little lumps
of the low swimming in the high. And the oldest and greatest of them have on them that which we have
never seen nor heard and cannot at all understand. But on the younger Maleldil has made to grow the
things like us, that breathe and breed."
"How have you found all this out? Your roof is so dense that your people cannot see through into Deep
Heaven and look at the other worlds."
Up till now her face had been grave. At this point she clapped her hands and a smile such as Ransom
had never seen changed her. One does not see that smile here except in children, but there was nothing
of the child about it there.
"Oh, I see it," she said. "I am older now. Your world has no roof. You look right out into the high place
and see the great dance with your own eyes. You live always in that terror and that delight, and what we
must only believe you can behold. Is not this a wonderful invention of Maleldil's? When I was young I
could imagine no beauty but this of our own world. But He can think of all, and all different."
"That is one of the things that is bewildering me," said Ransom. "That you are not different. You are
shaped like the women of my own kind. I had not expected that. I have been in one other world beside
my own. But the creatures there are not at all like you and me."
"What is bewildering about it?"
"I do not see why different worlds should bring forth like creatures. Do different trees bring forth like
fruit?"
"But that other world was older than yours," she said.
"How do you know that?" asked Ransom in amazement.
"Maleldil is telling me," answered the woman. And as she spoke the landscape had become different,
though with a difference none of the senses would identify. The light was dim, the air gentle, and all
Ransom's body was bathed in bliss, but the garden world where he stood seemed to be packed quite full,
and as if an unendurable pressure had been laid upon his shoulders, his legs failed him and he half sank,
half fell, into a sitting position.
"It all comes into my mind now," she continued. "I see the big furry creatures, and the white giants-what
is it you called them?-the Sorns, and the blue rivers. Oh, what a strong pleasure it would be to see them
with my outward eyes, to touch them, and the stronger because there are no more of that kind to come. It
is only in the ancient worlds they linger yet."
"Why?" said Ransom in a whisper, looking up at her.
"You must know that better than I," she said. "For was it not in your own world that all this happened?"
"All what?"
"I thought it would be you who would tell me of it," said the woman, now in her turn bewildered.
"What are you talking about?" said Ransom. "I mean," said she, "that in your world Maleldil first took
Himself this form, the form of your race and mine."
"You know that?" said Ransom sharply. Those who have had a dream which is very beautiful but from
which, nevertheless, they have ardently desired to awake, will understand his sensations.
"Yes, I know that. Maleldil has made me older to that amount since we began speaking." The expression
on her face was such as he had never seen, and could not steadily look at. The whole of this adventure
seemed to be slipping out of his hands. There was a long silence. He stooped down to the water and
drank before he spoke again.
"Oh, my Lady," he said, "why do you say that such creatures linger only in the ancient worlds?"
"Are you so young?" she answered. "How could they come again? Since our Beloved became a man,
how should Reason in any world take on another form? Do you not understand? That is all over. Among
times there is a time that turns a corner and everything this side of it is new. Times do not go backward."
"And can one little world like mine be the corner?" "I do not understand. Corner with us is not the name
of a size."
"And do you," said Ransom with some hesitation-"and do you know why He came thus to my world?"
All through this part of the conversation he found it difficult to look higher than her feet, so that her
answer was merely a voice in the air above him. "Yes," said the voice. "I know the reason. But it is not
the reason you know. There was more than one reason, and there is one I know and cannot tell to you,
and another that you know and cannot tell to me." "And after this," said Ransom, "it will all be men."
"You say it as if you were sorry."
"I think," said Ransom, "I have no more understanding than a beast. I do not well know what I am
saying. But I loved the furry people whom I met in Malacandra, that old world. Are they to be swept
away? Are they only rubbish in the Deep Heaven?" "I do not know what rubbish means," she answered,
"nor what you are saying. You do not mean they are worse because they come early in the history and
do not come again? They are their own part of the history and not another. We are on this side of the
wave and they on the far side. All is new."
One of Ransom's difficulties was an inability to be quite sure who was speaking at any moment in this
conversation. It may (or may not) have been due to the fact that he could not look long at her face. And
now he wanted the conversation to end. He had 'had enough'-not in the half-comic sense whereby we use
those words to mean that a man has had too much, but in the plain sense. He had had his fill, like a man
who has slept or eaten enough. Even an hour ago, he would have found it difficult to express this quite
bluntly, but now it came naturally to him to say:
"I do not wish to talk any more. But I would like to come over to your island so that we may meet again
when we wish." "Which do you call my island?" said the Lady. "The one you are on," said Ransom.
"What else?" "Come," she said, with a gesture that made that whole world a house and her a hostess. He
slid into the water and scrambled out beside her. Then he bowed, a little clumsily as all modem men do,
and walked away from her into a neighbouring wood. He found his legs unsteady and they ached a little;
in fact a curious physical exhaustion possessed him. He sat down to rest for a few minutes and fell
immediately into dreamless sleep.
He awoke completely refreshed but with a sense of insecurity. This had nothing to do with the fact that
he found himself, on waking, strangely attended. At his feet, and with its snout partially resting upon
them, lay the dragon; it had one eye shut and one open. As he rose on his elbow and looked about him
he found that he had another custodian at his head: a furred animal something like a wallaby but yellow.
It was the yellowiest thing he had ever seen. As soon as he moved both beasts began nudging him. They
would not leave him alone till he rose, and when he had risen they would not let him walk in any
direction but one. The dragon was much too heavy for him to shove it out of the way, and the yellow
beast danced round him in a fashion that headed him off from every direction but the one it wanted him
to go. He yielded to their pressure and allowed himself to be shepherded, first through a wood of higher
and browner trees than he had yet seen and then across a small open space and into a kind of alley of
bubble trees and beyond that into large fields of silver flowers that grew waist-high. And then he saw
that they had been bringing him to be shown to their mistress. She was standing a few yards away,
motionless but not apparently disengaged-doing something with her mind, perhaps even with her
muscles, that he did not understand. It was the first time he had looked steadily at her, himself
unobserved, and she seemed more strange to him than before. There was no category in the terrestrial
mind which would fit her. Opposites met in her and were fused in a fashion for which we have no
images. One way of putting it would be to say that neither our sacred nor our profane art could make her
portrait. Beautiful, naked, shameless, young- she was obviously a goddess: but then the face, the face so
calm that it escaped insipidity by the very concentration of its mildness, the face that was like the sudden
coldness and stillness of a church when we enter it from a hot street-that made her a Madonna. The alert,
inner silence which looked out from those eyes overawed him; yet at any moment she might laugh like a
child, or run like Artemis or dance like a Maenad. All this against the golden sky which looked as if it
were only an arm's length above her head. The beasts raced forward to greet her, and as they rushed
through the feathery vegetation they startled from it masses of the frogs, so that it looked as if huge
drops of vividly coloured dew were being tossed in the air. She turned as they approached her and
welcomed them, and once again the picture was half like many earthly scenes but in its total effect
unlike them all. It was not really like a woman making much of a horse, nor yet a child playing with a
puppy. There was in her face an authority, in her caresses a condescension, which by taking seriously
the inferiority of her adorers made them somehow less inferior-raised them from the status of pets to that
of slaves. As Ransom reached her she stooped and whispered something in the ear of the yellow
creature, and then, addressing the dragon, bleated to it almost in its own voice. Both of them, having
received their congé, darted back into the woods.
"The beasts in your world seem almost rational," said Ransom.
"We make them older every day," she answered. "Is not that what it means to be a beast?"
But Ransom clung to her use of the word we.
"That is what I have come to speak to you about," he said. "Maleldil has sent me to your world for some
purpose. Do you know what it is?"
She stood for a moment almost like one listening and then answered "No."
"Then you must take me to your home and show me to your people."
"People? I do not know what you are saying." "Your kindred-the others of your kind." "Do you mean the
King?"
"Yes. If you have a King, I had better be brought before him."
"I cannot do that," she answered. "I do not know where to find him." "To your own home then." "What
is home?'
"The place where people live together and have their possessions and bring up their children."
She spread out her hands to indicate all that was in sight. "This is my home," she said. "Do you live here
alone?" asked Ransom. "What is alone?"
Ransom tried a fresh start. "Bring me where I shall meet others of our kind."
"It you mean the King, I have already told you I do not know where he is. When we were young-many
days ago-we were leaping from island to island, and when he was on one and I was on another the waves
rose and we were driven apart."
"But can you take me to some other of your kind? The King cannot be the only one." "He is the only
one. Did you not know?" "But there must be others of your kind-your brothers and sisters, your kindred,
your friends." "I do not know what these words mean." "Who is this King?" said Ransom in desperation.
"He is himself, he is the King," said she. "How can one answer such a question?"
"Look here," said Ransom. "You must have had a mother. Is she alive? Where is she? When did you see
her last?"
"I have a mother?" said the Green Lady, looking full at him with eyes of untroubled wonder. "What do
you mean? I am the Mother." And once again there fell upon Ransom the feeling that it was not she, or
not she only, who had spoken. No other sound came to his ears, for the sea and the air were still, but a
phantom sense of vast choral music was all about him. The awe which her apparently witless replies had
been dissipating for the last few minutes returned upon him.
"I do not understand," he said.
"Nor I," answered the Lady. "Only my spirit praises Maleldil who comes down from Deep Heaven into
this lowness and will make me to be blessed by all the tunes that are rolling towards us. It is He who is
strong and makes me strong and fills empty worlds with good creatures."
"If you are a mother, where are your children?"
"Not yet," she answered.
"Who will be their father?"
"The King-who else?"
"But the King-had he no father?"
"He is the Father."
"You mean," said Ransom slowly, "that you and he are the only two of your kind in the whole world?"
"Of course." Then presently her face changed. "Oh, how young I have been," she said. "I see it now. I
had known that there were many creatures in that ancient world of the Hrossa and the Sorns. But I had
forgotten that yours also was an older world than ours. I see-there are many of you by now. I had been
thinking that of you also there were only two. I thought you were the King and Father of your world. But
there are children of children of children by now, and you perhaps are one of these."
"Yes," said Ransom.
"Greet your Lady and Mother well from me when you return to your own world," said the Green
Woman. And now for the first time there was a note of deliberate courtesy, even of ceremony, in her
speech. Ransom understood. She knew now at last that she was not addressing an equal. She was a
queen sending a message to a queen through a commoner, and her manner to him was henceforward
more gracious. He found it difficult to make his next answer.
"Our -Mother and Lady is dead," he said.
"What is dead?"
"With us they go away after a time. Maleldil takes the soul out of them and puts it somewhere else-in
Deep Heaven, we 'hope. They call it death."
"Do not wonder, 0 Piebald Man, that your world should have been chosen for time's comer. You live
looking out always on heaven itself, and as if this were not enough Maleldil takes you all thither in the
end. You are favoured beyond all worlds."
Ransom shook his head. "No. It is not like that," he said. "I wonder," said the woman, "if you were sent
here to teach us death."
"You don't understand," he said. "It is not like that. It is horrible. It has a foul smell. Maleldil Himself
wept when He saw it." Both his voice and his facial expression were apparently something new to her.
He saw the shock, not of horror, but of utter bewilderment, on her face for one instant and then, without
effort, the ocean of her peace swallowed it up as if it had never been, and she asked him what he meant.
"You could never understand. Lady," he replied. "But in our world not all events are pleasing or
welcome. There may be such a thing that you could cut off both your arms and your legs to prevent it
happening-and yet it happens: with us."
"But how can one wish any of those waves not to reach us which Maleldil is rolling towards us?"
Against his better judgment Ransom found himself goaded into argument.
"But even you," he said, "when you first saw me, I know now you were expecting and hoping that I was
the King. When you found I was not, your face changed. Was that event not unwelcome? Did you not
wish it to be otherwise?"
"Oh," said the Lady. She turned aside with her head bowed and her hands clasped in an intensity of
thought. She looked up and said, "You make me grow older more quickly than I can bear," and walked a
little farther off. Ransom wondered what he had done. It was suddenly borne in upon him that her purity
and peace were not, as they had seemed, things settled and inevitable like the purity and peace of an
animal- that they were alive and therefore breakable, a balance maintained by a mind and therefore, at
least in theory, able to be lost. There is no reason why a man on a smooth road should lose his balance
on a bicycle; but he could. There was no reason why she should step out of her happiness into the
psychology of our own race; but neither was there any wall between to prevent her doing so. The sense
of precariousness terrified him: but when she looked at him again he changed that word to Adventure,
and then all words died out of his mind. Once more he could not look steadily at her. He knew now what
the old painters were trying to represent when they invented the halo. Gaiety and gravity together, a
splendour as of martyrdom yet with no pain in. it at all, seemed to pour from her countenance. Yet when
she spoke her words were a disappointment.
"I have been so young till this moment that all my life now seems to have been a kind of sleep. I have
thought that I was being carried, and behold, I was walking." Ransom asked what she meant. "What you
have made me see," answered the Lady, "is as plain as the sky, but I never saw it before. Yet it has
happened every day. One goes into the forest to pick food and already the thought of one fruit rather
than another has grown up in one's mind. Then, it may be, one finds a different fruit and not the fruit one
thought of. One joy was expected and another is given. But this I had never noticed before-that at the
very moment of the finding there is in the mind a kind of thrusting back, or a setting aside. The picture
of the fruit you have not found is still, for a moment, before you. And if you wished-if it were possible
to wish-you could keep it there. You could send your soul after the good you had expected, instead of
turning it to the good you had got. You could refuse the real good; you could make the real fruit taste
insipid by thinking of the other."
Ransom interrupted. "That is hardly the same thing as finding a stranger when you wanted your
husband."
"Oh, that is how I came to understand the whole thing. You and the King differ more than two kinds of
fruit. The joy of finding him again and the joy of all the new knowledge I have had from you are more
unlike than two tastes; and when the difference is as great as that, and each of the two things so great,
then the first picture does stay in the mind quite a long time- many beats of the heart-after the other good
has come. And this, 0 Piebald, is the glory and wonder you have made me see; that it is I, I myself, who
turn from the good expected to the given good. Out of my own heart I do it. One can conceive a heart
which did not: which clung to the good it had first thought of and turned the good which was given it
into no good."
"I don't see the wonder and the glory of it," said Ransom. Her eyes flashed upon him such a triumphant
flight above his thoughts as would have been scorn in earthly eyes; but in that world it was not scorn.
"I thought," she said, "that I was carried in the will of Him I love, but now I see that I walk with it. I
thought that the good things He sent me drew me into them as the waves lift the islands; but now I see
that it is I who plunge into them with my own legs and arms, as when we go swimming. I feel as if I
were living in that roofless world of yours when men walk undefended beneath naked heaven. It is
delight with terror in it! One's own self to be walking from one good to another, walking beside Him as
Himself may walk, not even holding hands. How has He made me so separate from Himself? How did it
enter His mind to conceive such a thing? The world is so much larger than I thought. I thought we went
along paths -but it seems there are no paths. The going itself is the path."
"And have you no fear," said Ransom, "that it will ever be hard to turn your heart from the thing you
wanted to the thing Maleldil sends?"
"I see," said the Lady presently. "The wave you plunge into may be very swift and great. You may need
all your force to swim into it. You mean. He might send me a good like that?"
"Yes-or like a wave so swift and great that all your force was too little."
"It often happens that way in swimming," said the Lady. "Is not that part of the delight?"
"But are you happy without the King? Do you not want the King?"
"Want him?" she said. "How could there be anything I did not want?"
There was something in her replies that began to repel Ransom. "You can't want him very much if you
are happy without him," he said: and was immediately surprised at the sulkiness of his own voice.
"Why?" said the Lady. "And why, 0 Piebald, are you making little hills and valleys in your forehead and
why do you give a little lift of your shoulders? Are these the signs of something in your world?"
"They mean nothing," said Ransom hastily. It was a small lie; but there it would not do. It tore him as he
uttered it, like a vomit. It became of infinite importance. The silver meadow and the golden sky seemed
to fling it back at him. As if stunned by some measureless anger in the very air he stammered an
emendation: "They mean nothing I could explain to you." The Lady was looking at him with a new and
more judicial expression. Perhaps in the presence of the first mother's son she had ever seen, she was
already dimly forecasting the problems that might arise when she had children of her own.
"We have talked enough now," she said at last. At first he thought she was going to turn away and leave
him. Then, when she did not move, he bowed and drew back a step or two. She still said nothing and
seemed to have forgotten about him. He turned and retraced his way through the deep vegetation until
they were out of sight of each other. The audience was at an end.
As soon as the Lady was out of sight Ransom's first impulse was to run his hands through his hair, to
expel the breath from his lungs in a long whistle, to light a cigarette, to put his hands in his pockets, and
in general, to go through all that ritual of relaxation which a man performs on finding himself alone after
a rather trying interview. But he had no cigarettes and no pockets: nor indeed did he feel himself alone.
That sense of being in Someone's Presence which had descended on him with such unbearable pressure
during the very first moments of his conversation with the Lady did not disappear when he had left her.
It was, if anything, increased. Her society had been, in some degree, a protection against it, and her
absence left him not to solitude but to a more formidable kind of privacy. At first it was almost
intolerable; as he put it to us, in telling the story, 'There seemed no room.' But later on, he discovered
that it was intolerable only at certain moments-at just those moments in fact (symbolised by his impulse
to smoke and to put his hands in his pockets) when a man asserts his independence and feels that now at
last he's on his own. When you felt like that, then the very air seemed too crowded to breathe; a
complete fullness seemed to be excluding you from a place which, nevertheless, you were unable to
leave. But when you gave in to the thing, gave yourself up to it, there was no burden to be borne. It
became not a load but a medium, a sort of splendour as of eatable, drinkable, breathable gold, which fed
and carried you and not only poured into you but out from you as well. Taken the wrong way, it
suffocated; taken the right way, it made terrestrial life seem, by comparison, a vacuum. At first, of
course, the wrong moments occurred pretty often. But like a man who has a wound that hurts him in
certain positions and who gradually learns to avoid those positions, Ransom learned not to make that
inner gesture. His day became better and better as the hours passed.
During the course of the day he explored the island pretty thoroughly. The sea was still calm and it
would have been possible in many directions to have reached neighbouring islands by a mere jump. He
was placed, however, at the edge of this temporary archipelago, and from one shore he found himself
looking out on the open sea. They were lying, or else very slowly drifting, in the neighbourhood of the
huge green column which he had seen a few moments after his arrival in Perelandra. He had an excellent
view of this object at about a mile's distance. It was dearly a mountainous island. The column turned out
to be really a cluster of columns-that is, of crags much higher than they were broad, rather like
exaggerated dolomites, but smoother: so much smoother in fact that it might be truer to describe them as
pillars from the Giant's Causeway magnified to the height of mountains. This huge upright mass did not,
however, rise directly from the sea. The island had a base of rough country, but with smoother land at
the coast, and a hint of valleys with vegetation in them between the ridges, and even of steeper and
narrower valleys which ran some way up between the central crags. It was certainly land, real fixed land
with its roots in the solid surface of the planet. He could dimly make out the texture of true rock from
where he sat. Some of it was inhabitable land. He felt a great desire to explore it. It looked as if a landing
would present no difficulties, and even the great mountain itself might turn out to be climbable.
He did not see the Lady again that day. Early next morning, after he had amused himself by swimming
for a little and eaten his first meal, he was again seated on the shore looking out towards the Fixed Land.
Suddenly he heard her voice behind him and looked round. She had come forth from the woods with
some beasts, as usual, following her. Her words had been words of greeting, but she showed no
disposition to talk. She came and stood on the edge of the floating island beside him and looked with
him towards the Fixed Land.
"I will go there," she said at last.
"May I go with you?" asked Ransom.
"If you will," said the Lady. "But you see it is the Fixed Land."
"That is why I wish to tread on it," said Ransom. "In my world all the lands are fixed, and it would give
me pleasure to walk in such a land again."
She gave a sudden exclamation of surprise and stared at him.
"Where, then, do you live in your world?" she asked.
"On the lands."
"But you said they are all fixed."
"Yes. We live on the fixed lands."
For the first time since they had met, something not quite unlike an expression of horror or disgust
passed over her face.
"But what do you do during the nights?"
"During the nights?" said Ransom in bewilderment. "Why, we sleep, of course."
"But where?"
"Where we live. On the land."
She remained in deep thought so long that Ransom feared she was never going to speak again. When she
did, her voice was hushed and once more tranquil, though the note of joy had not yet returned to it.
"He has never bidden you not to," she said, less as a question than as a statement.
"No," said Ransom.
"There can, then, be different laws in different worlds."
"Is there a law in your world not to sleep in a Fixed Land?"
"Yes," said the Lady. "He does not wish us to dwell there. We may land on them and walk on them, for
the world is ours. But to stay there-to sleep and awake there . .." she ended with a shudder.
"You couldn't have that law in our world," said Ransom. "There are no floating lands with us."
"How many of you are there?" asked the Lady suddenly. Ransom found that he didn't know the
population of the Earth, but contrived to give her some idea of many millions. He had expected her to be
astonished, but it appeared that numbers did not interest her. "How do you all find room on your Fixed
Land?" she asked.
"There is not one fixed land, but many," he answered. "And they are big: almost as big as the sea."
"How do you endure it?" she burst out. "Almost half your world empty and dead. Loads and loads of
land, all tied down. Does not the very thought of it crush you?"
"Not at all," said Ransom. "The very thought of a world which was all sea like yours would make my
people unhappy and afraid."
"Where will this end?" said the Lady, speaking more to herself than to him. "I have grown so old in
these last few hours that all my life before seems only like the stem of a tree, and now I am like the
branches shooting out in every direction. They are getting so wide apart that I can hardly bear it. First to
have learned that I walk from good to good with my own feet. . . that was a stretch enough. But now it
seems that good is not the same in all worlds; that Maleldil has forbidden in one what He allows in
another."
"Perhaps my world is wrong about this," said Ransom rather feebly, for he was dismayed at what he had
done.
"It is not so," said she. "Maleldil Himself has told me now. And it could not be so, if your world has no
floating lands. But He is not telling me why He has forbidden it to us."
"There's probably some good reason," began Ransom, when he was interrupted by her sudden laughter.
"Oh, Piebald, Piebald," she said, still laughing. "How often the people of your race speak!"
"I'm sorry," said Ransom, a little put out. "What are you sorry for?" "I am sorry if you think I talk too
much." "Too much? How can I tell what would be too much for you to talk?"
"In our world when they say a man talks much they mean they wish him to be silent."
"If that is what they mean, why do they not say it?" "What made you laugh?" asked Ransom, finding her
question too hard.
"I laughed. Piebald, because you were wondering, as I was, about this law which Maleldil has made for
one world and not for another. And you had nothing to say about it and yet made the nothing up into
words."
"I had something to say, though," said Ransom almost under his breath. "At least," he added in a louder
voice, "this forbidding is no hardship in such a world as yours."
"That also is a strange thing to say," replied the Lady. "Who thought of its being hard? The beasts would
not think it hard if I told them to walk on their heads. It would become their delight to walk on their
heads. I am His beast, and all His biddings are joys. It is not that which makes me thoughtful. But it was
coming into my mind to wonder whether there are two kinds of bidding."
"Some of our wise men have said . .." began Ransom, when she interrupted him.
"Let us wait and ask the King," she said. "For I think. Piebald, you do not know much more about this
than I do." "Yes, the King, by all means," said Ransom. "If only we can find him." Then, quite
involuntarily, he added in English, "By Jove! What was that?" She also had exclaimed. Something like a
shooting star seemed to have streaked across the sky, far away on their left, and some seconds later an
indeterminate noise reached their ears. "What was that?" he asked again, this time in Old Solar.
"Something has fallen out of Deep Heaven," said the Lady. Her face showed wonder and curiosity: but
on Earth we so rarely see these emotions without some admixture of defensive fear that her expression
seemed strange to him.
"I think you're right," said he. "Hullo! What's this?" The calm sea had swelled and all the weeds at the
edge of their island were in movement. A single wave passed under their island and all was still again.
"Something has certainly fallen into the sea," said the Lady. Then she resumed the conversation as if
nothing had happened.
"It was to look for the King that I had resolved to go over today to the Fixed Land. He is on none of
these islands here, for I have searched them all. But if we climbed high up on the Fixed Land and looked
about, then we should see a long way. We could see if there are any other islands near us."
Let us do this," said Ransom. "If we can swim so far." "We shall ride," said the Lady. Then she knelt
down on the shore-and such grace was in all her movements that it was a wonder to see her kneel-and
gave three low calls all on the same note. At first no result was visible. But soon Ransom saw broken
water coming rapidly towards them. A moment later and the sea beside the island was a mass of the
large silver fishes: spouting, curling their bodies, pressing upon one another to get nearer, and the
nearest ones nosing the land. They had not only the colour but the smoothness of silver. The biggest
were about nine feet long and all were thick-set and powerful-looking. They were very unlike any
terrestrial species, for the base of the head was noticeably wider than the foremost part of the trunk. But
then the trunk itself grew thicker again towards the tail. Without this tailward bulge they would have
looked like giant tadpoles. As it was, they suggested rather pot-bellied and narrow-chested old men with
very big heads. The Lady seemed to take a long time in selecting two of them. But the moment she had
done so the others all fell back for a few yards and the two successful candidates wheeled round and lay
still with their tails to the shore, gently moving their fins. "Now, Piebald, like this," she said, and seated
herself astride the narrow part of the right-hand fish. Ransom followed her example. The great head in
front of him served instead of shoulders so that there was no danger of sliding off. He watched his
hostess. She gave her fish a slight kick with her heels. He did the same to his. A moment later they were
gliding out to sea at about six miles an hour. The air over the water was cooler and the breeze lifted his
hair. In a world where he had as yet only swum and walked, the fish's progress gave the impression of
quite an exhilarating speed. He glanced back and saw the feathery and billowy mass of the islands
receding and the sky growing larger and more emphatically golden. Ahead, the fantastically shaped and
coloured mountain dominated his whole field of vision. He noticed with interest that the whole school of
rejected fish were still with them-some following, but the majority gambolling in wide extended wings
to left and right. "Do they always follow like this?" he asked. "Do the beasts not follow in your world?"
she replied. "We cannot ride more than two. It would be hard if those we did not choose were not even
allowed to follow."
"Was that why you took so long to choose the two fish, Lady?" he asked.
"Of course," said the Lady. "I try not to choose the same fish too often."
The land came towards them apace and what had seemed level coastline began to open into bays and
thrust itself forward into promontories. And now they were near enough to see that in this apparently
calm ocean there was an invisible swell, a very faint rise and fall of water on the beach. A moment later
the fishes lacked depth to swim any further, and following the Green Lady's example. Ransom slipped
both his legs to one side of his fish and groped down with his toes. Oh, ecstasy!- they touched solid
pebbles. He had not realised till now that he was pining for "fixed land'. He looked up. Down to the bay
in which they were landing ran a steep narrow valley with low cliffs and outcroppings of a reddish rock
and, lower down, banks of some kind of moss and a few trees. The trees might almost have been
terrestrial: planted in any southern country of our own world they would not have seemed remarkable to
anyone except a trained botanist. Best of all, down the middle of the valley-and welcome to Ransom's
eyes and ears as a glimpse of home or of heaven-ran a little stream, a dark translucent stream where a
man might hope for trout.
"You love this land. Piebald?" said the Lady, glancing at him.
"Yes," said he, "it is like my own world."
They began to walk up the valley to its head. When they were under the trees the resemblance of an
earthly country was diminished, for there is so much less light in that world that the glade which should
have cast only a little shadow cast a forest gloom. It was about a quarter of a mile to the top of the
valley, where it narrowed into a mere cleft between low rocks. With one or two grips and a leap the
Lady was up these, and Ransom followed. He was amazed at her strength. They emerged into a steep
upland covered with a kind of turf which would have been very like grass but that there was more blue
in it. It seemed to be closely cropped and dotted with white fluffy objects as far as the eye could reach.
"Flowers?" asked Ransom. The Lady laughed.
"No. These are the Piebalds. I named you after them." He was puzzled for a moment but presently the
objects began to move, and soon to move quickly, towards the human pair whom they had apparently
winded-for they were already so high that there was a strong breeze. In a moment they were bounding
all about the Lady and welcoming her. They were white beasts with black spots-about the size of sheep
but with ears so much larger, noses so much mobile, and tails so much longer, that the general
impression was rather of enormous mice. Their claw-like or almost hand-like paws were clearly built for
climbing, and the bluish turf was their food. After a proper interchange of courtesies with these
creatures. Ransom and the Lady continued their journey. The circle of golden sea below them was now
spread out in an enormous expanse and the green rock pillars above seemed almost to overhang. But it
was a long and stiff climb to their base. The temperature here was much lower, though it was still warm.
The silence was also noticeable. Down below, on the islands, though one had not remarked it at the time,
there must have been a continual background of water noises, bubble noises, and the movement of
beasts.
They were now entering into a kind of bay or re-entrant of turf between two of the green pillars. Seen
from below these had appeared to touch one another; but now, though they had gone in so deep between
two of them that most of the view was cut off on either hand, there was still room for a battalion to
march in line. The slope grew steeper every moment; and as it grew steeper the space between the pillars
also grew narrower. Soon they were scrambling on hands and knees in a place where the green walls
which joined, like a gum of rock, the roots of the two monstrous teeth of the mountain. 'I'd give a good
deal to have a pair of trousers on,' thought Ransom to himself as he looked at it. The Lady, who was
ahead, stood on tiptoe and raised her arms to catch a projection on the lip of the ridge. Then he saw her
pull, apparently intending to lift her whole weight on her arms and swing herself to the top in a single
movement. "Look here, you can't do it that way," he began, speaking inadvertently in English, but before
he had time to correct himself she was standing on the edge above him. He did not see exactly how it
was done, but there was no sign that she had taken any unusual exertion. His own climb was a less
dignified affair, and it was a panting and perspiring man with a smudge of blood on his knee who finally
stood beside her. She was inquisitive about the blood, and when he had explained the phenomenon to
her as well as he could, wanted to scrape a little skin off her own knee to see if the same would happen.
This led him to try to explain to her what was meant by pain, which only made her more anxious to try
the experiment. But at the last moment Maleldil apparently told her not to.
Ransom now turned to survey their surroundings. High overhead, and seeming by perspective to lean
inwards towards each other at the top and almost to shut out the sky, rose the immense piers of rock-not
two or three of them, but nine.. Some of them, like those two between which they had entered the circle,
were dose together. Others were many yards apart. They surrounded a roughly oval plateau of perhaps
seven acres, covered with a finer turf than any known on our planet and dotted with tiny crimson
flowers. A high, singing wind carried, as it were, a cooled and refined quintessence of all the scents from
the richer world below, and kept these in continual agitation. Glimpses of the far-spread sea, visible
between pillars, made one continually conscious of great height; and Ransom's eyes, long accustomed to
the medley of curves and colours in the floating islands, rested on the pure lines and stable masses of
this place with great refreshment. He took a few paces forward into the cathedral spaciousness of the
plateau, and when he spoke his voice woke echoes.
"Oh, this is good," he said. "But perhaps you-you to whom it is forbidden-do not feel it so." But a glance
at the Lady's face told him he was wrong. He did not know what was in her mind; but her face, as once
or twice before, seemed to shine with something before which he dropped his eyes. "Let us examine the
sea," she said presently.
They made the circle of the plateau methodically. Behind them lay the group of islands from which they
had set out that morning. Seen from this altitude it was larger even than Ransom had supposed. The
richness of its colours-its orange, its silver, its purple and (to his surprise) its glossy blacks-made it seem
almost heraldic. It was from this direction that the wind came; the smell of those islands though faint,
was like the sound of running water to a thirsty man. But on every other side they saw nothing but the
ocean. At least, they saw no islands. But when they had made almost the whole circuit, Ransom shouted
and the Lady pointed almost at the same moment. About two miles off, dark against the coppery-green
of the water, there was some small round object. If he had been looking down on an earthly sea Ransom
would have taken it, at first sight, for a buoy.
"I do not know what it is," said the Lady. "Unless it is the thing that fell out of Deep Heaven this
morning."
'I wish I had a pair of field-glasses,' thought Ransom, for the Lady's words had awakened in him a
sudden suspicion. And the longer he stared at the dark blob the more his suspicion was confirmed. It
appeared to be perfectly spherical; and he thought he had seen something like it before.
You have already heard that Ransom had been in that world which men call Mars but whose true name
is Malacandra. But he had not been taken thither by the eldila. He had been taken by men, and taken in a
space-ship, a hollow sphere of glass and steel. He had, in fact, been kidnapped by men who thought that
the ruling powers of Malacandra demanded a human sacrifice. The whole thing had been a
misunderstanding. The great Oyarsa who has governed Mars from the beginning (and whom my own
eyes beheld, in a sense, in the hall of Ransom's cottage) had done him no harm and meant him none. But
his chief captor. Professor Weston, had meant plenty of harm. He was a man obsessed with the idea
which is at this moment circulating all over our planet in obscure works of 'scientification', in little
Interplanetary Societies and Rocketry Clubs, and between the covers of monstrous magazines, ignored
or mocked by the intellectuals, but ready, if ever the power is put into its hands, to open a new chapter of
misery for the universe. It is the idea that humanity, having now sufficiently corrupted the planet where
it arose, must at all costs contrive to seed itself over a larger area: that the vast astronomical distances
which are God's quarantine regulations, must somehow be overcome. This for a start. But beyond this
lies the sweet poison of the false infinite-the wild dream that planet after planet, system after system, in
the end galaxy after galaxy, can be forced to sustain, everywhere and for ever, the sort of life which is
contained in the loins of our own species-a dream begotten by the hatred of death upon the fear of true
immortality, fondled in secret by thousands of ignorant men and hundreds who are not ignorant. The
destruction or enslavement of other species in the universe, if such there are, is to these minds a
welcome corollary. In Professor Weston the power had at last met the dream. The great physicist had
discovered a motive power for his space-ship. And that little black object, how floating beneath him on
the sinless waters of Perelandra, looked to Ransom more like the space-ship every moment. 'So that,' he
thought, 'that is why I have been sent here. He failed on Malacandra and now he is coming here. And it's
up to me to do something about it.' A terrible sense of inadequacy swept over him. Last time-in MarsWeston
had had only one accomplice. But he had had firearms. And how many accomplices might he
have this time? And in Mars he had been foiled not by Ransom but by the eldila, and specially the great
eldil, the Oyarsa, of that world. He turned quickly to the Lady. "I have seen no eldila in your world,' he
said. "Eldila?" she repeated as if it were a new name to her. "Yes. Uldila," said Ransom, "the great and
ancient servants of Maleldil. The creatures that neither breed nor breathe. Whose bodies are made of
light. Whom we can hardly see. Who ought to be obeyed."
She mused for a moment and then spoke. "Sweetly and gently this time Maleldil makes me older. He
shows me all the natures of these blessed creatures. But there is no obeying them now, not in this world.
That is all the old order. Piebald, the far side of the wave that has rolled past us and will not come again.
That very ancient world to which you journeyed was put under the eldila. In your own world also they
ruled once;
but not since our Beloved became a Man. In your world they linger still. But in our world, which is the
first of worlds to wake after the great change, they have no power. There is nothing now between us and
Him. They have grown less and we have increased. And now Maleldil puts it into my mind that this is
their glory and their joy. They received us-us things of the low worlds, who breed and breathe-as weak
and small beasts whom their lightest touch could destroy; and their glory was to cherish us and make us
older till we were older than they-till they could fall at our feet. It is a joy we shall not have. However I
teach the beasts they will never be better than I. But it is a joy beyond all. Not that it is better joy than
ours. Every joy is beyond all others. The fruit we are eating is always the best fruit of all."
"There have been eldila who did not think it a joy," said Ransom.
"How?"
"You spoke yesterday. Lady, of clinging to the old good instead of taking the good that came."
"Yes-for a few heart-beats."
"There was an eldil who clung longer-who has been clinging since before the worlds were made."
"But the old good would cease to be a good at all if he did that."
"Yes. It has ceased. And still he clings."
She stared at him in wonder and was about to speak, but he interrupted her.
"There is not time to explain," he said.
"No time? What has happened to the time?" she asked.
"Listen," he said. "That thing down here has come through Deep Heaven from my world. There is a man
in it: perhaps many men--"
"Look," she said, "it is turning into two-one big and one small."
Ransom saw that a small black object had detached itself from the space-ship and was beginning to
move uncertainly away from it. It puzzled him for a moment. Then it dawned on him that Weston-if it
was Weston-probably knew the watery surface he had to expect on Venus and had brought some kind of
collapsible boat. But could it be that he had not reckoned with tides or storms and did not foresee that it
might be impossible for him ever to recover the space-ship? It was not like Weston to cut off his own
retreat. And Ransom certainly did not wish Weston's retreat to be cut off. A Weston - who could not,
even if he chose, return to Earth, was an insoluble problem. Anyway, what could he. Ransom, possibly
do without support from the eldila? He began to smart under a sense of injustice. What was the good of
sending him-a mere scholar-to cope with a situation of this sort? Any ordinary pugilist, or, better still,
any man who could make good use of a tommy-gun, would have been more to the purpose. If only they
could find this King whom the Green Woman kept on talking about...
But while these thoughts were passing through his mind he became aware of a dim murmuring or
growling sound which had gradually been encroaching on the silence for some time. "Look," said the
Lady suddenly, and pointed to the mass of islands. Their surface was no longer level. At the same
moment he realised that the noise was that of waves: small waves as yet, but definitely beginning to
foam on the rocky headlands of the Fixed Island- "The sea is rising," said the Lady. "We must go down
and leave this land at once. Soon the waves will be too great-and I must not be here by night."
"Not that way," shouted Ransom. "Not where you will meet the man from my world."
"Why?" said the Lady. "I am Lady and Mother of this world. If the King is not here, who else should
greet a stranger?"
"I will meet him."
"It is not your world. Piebald," she replied.
"You do not understand," said Ransom. "This man-he is a friend of that eldil of whom I told you-one of
those who cling to the wrong good."
"Then I must explain it to him," said the Lady. "Let us go and make him older," and with that she slung
herself down the rocky edge of the plateau and began descending the mountain slope. Ransom took
longer to manage the rocks; but once his feet were again on the turf he began running as fast as he could.
The Lady cried out in surprise as he flashed past her, but he took no notice. He could now see clearly
which bay the little boat was making for and his attention was fully occupied in directing his course and
making sure of his feet. There was only one man in the boat. Down and down the long slope he raced.
Now he was in a fold: now in a winding valley which momentarily cut off the sight of the sea. Now at
last he was in the cove itself. He glanced back and saw to his dismay that the Lady had also been
running and was only a few yards behind. He glanced forward again. There were waves, though not yet
very large ones, breaking on the pebbly beach. A man in shirt and shorts and a pith helmet was ankledeep
in the water, wading ashore and pulling after him a little canvas punt. It was certainly Weston,
though his face had something about it which seemed subtly unfamiliar. It seemed to Ransom of vital
importance to prevent a meeting between Weston and the Lady. He had seen Weston murder an
inhabitant of Malacandra. He turned back, stretching out both arms to bar her way and shouting "Go
back!" She was too near. For a second she was almost in his arms. Then she stood back from him,
panting from the race, surprised, her mouth opened to speak. But at that moment he heard Weston's
voice, from behind him, saying in English, "May I ask you, Dr Ransom, what is the meaning of this?"
IN all the circumstances it would have been reasonable to expect that Weston would be much more
taken aback at Ransom's presence than Ransom could be at his. But if he were, he showed no sign of it,
and Ransom could hardly help admiring the massive egoism which enabled this man in the very moment
of his arrival on an unknown world to stand there unmoved in all his authoritative vulgarity, his arms
akimbo, his face scowling, and his feet planted as solidly on that unearthly soil as if he had been
standing with his back to the fire in his own study. Then, with a shock, he noticed that Weston was
speaking to the Lady in the Old Solar language with perfect fluency. On Malacandra, partly from
incapacity, and much more from his contempt for the inhabitants, he had never acquired more than a
smattering of it. Here was an inexplicable and disquieting novelty. Ransom felt that his only advantage
had been taken from him. He felt that he was now in the presence of the incalculable. If the scales had
been suddenly weighted in this one respect, what might come next?
He awoke, from his abstraction to find that Weston and the Lady had been conversing fluently, but
without mutual understanding. "It is no use," she was saying. "You and I are not old enough to speak
together, it seems. The sea is rising; let us go back to the islands. Will he come with us, Piebald?"
"Where are the two fishes?" said Ransom. "They will be waiting in the next bay," said the Lady. "Quick,
then," said Ransom to her; and then, in answer to her look: "No, he will not come." She did not,
presumably, understand his urgency, but her eye was on the sea and she understood her own reason for
haste. She had already begun to ascend the side of the valley, with Ransom following her, when Weston
shouted, "No, you don't." Ransom turned and found himself covered by a revolver. The sudden heat
which swept over his body was the only sign by which he knew that he was frightened. His head
remained dear.
"Are you going to begin in this world also by murdering one of its inhabitants?" he asked.
"What are you saying?" asked the Lady, pausing and looking back at the two men with a puzzled,
tranquil face.
"Stay where you are. Ransom," said the Professor. "That native can go where she likes, the sooner the
better."
Ransom was about to implore her to make good her escape when he realised that no imploring was
needed. He had irrationally supposed that she would understand the situation; but apparently she saw
nothing more than two strangers talking about something which she did not at the moment understand -
that, and her own necessity of leaving the Fixed Land at once.
"You and he do not come with me. Piebald?" she asked.
"No," said Ransom, without turning round. "It may be that you and I shall not meet soon again. Greet the
King for me if you find him and speak of me always to Maleldil. I stay here."
"We shall meet when Maleldil pleases," she answered, "or if not, some greater good will happen to us
instead." Then he heard her footsteps behind him for a few seconds, and then he heard them no more and
knew he was alone with Weston.
"You allowed yourself to use the word Murder just now, Dr Ransom," said the Professor, "in reference
to an accident that occurred when we were in Malacandra. In any case, the creature killed was not a
human being. Allow me to tell you that I consider the seduction of a native girl as an almost equally
unfortunate way of introducing civilisation to a new planet."
"Seduction?" said Ransom. "Oh, I see. You thought I was making love to her."
"When I find a naked civilised man embracing a naked savage woman in a solitary place, that is the
name I give to it."
"I wasn't embracing her," said Ransom dully, for the whole business of defending himself on this score
seemed at that moment a mere weariness of the spirit. "And no one wears clothes here. But what does it
matter? Get on with the job that brings you to Perelandra."
"You ask me to believe that you have been living here with that woman under these conditions in a state
of sexless innocence?"
"Oh, sexless!" said Ransom disgustedly. "All right, if you like. It's about as good a description of living
in Perelandra as it would be to say that a man had forgotten water because Niagara Falls didn't
immediately give him the idea of making it into cups of tea. But you're right enough if you mean that I
have had no more thought of desiring her than-than . .." Comparisons failed him and his voice died.
Then he began again: "But don't say I'm asking you to believe it, or to believe anything. I am asking you
nothing but to begin and end as soon as possible whatever butcheries and robberies you have come to
do."
Weston eyed him for a moment with a curious expression:
then, unexpectedly, he returned his revolver to its holster. "Ransom," he said, "you do me a great
injustice." For several seconds there was silence between them. Long breakers with white woolpacks of
foam on them were now rolling into the cove exactly as on Earth.
"Yes," said Weston at last, "and I will begin with a frank admission. You may make what capital of it
you please. I shall not be deterred. I deliberately say that I was, in some respects, mistaken-seriously
mistaken-in my conception of the whole interplanetary problem when I went to Malacandra."
Partly from the relaxation which followed the disappearance of the pistol, and partly from the elaborate
air of magnanimity with which the great scientist spoke. Ransom felt very much inclined to laugh. But it
occurred to him that this was possibly the first occasion in his whole life in which Weston had ever
acknowledged himself in the wrong, and that even the fake dawn of humility, which is still ninety-nine
per cent of arrogance, ought not to be rebuffed-or not by him.
"Well, that's very handsome," he said. "How do you mean?"
"I'll tell you presently," said Weston. "In the meantime I must get my things ashore." Between them they
beached the punt, and began carrying Weston's primus-stove and tins and tent and other packages to a
spot about two hundred yards inland. Ransom, who knew all the paraphernalia to be needless, made no
objection, and in about a quarter of an hour something like an encampment had been established in a
mossy place under some blue-trunked silver-leaved trees beside a rivulet. Both men sat down and
Ransom listened at first with interest, then with amazement, and finally with incredulity. Weston cleared
his throat, threw out his chest, and assumed his lecturing manner. Throughout the conversation that
followed, Ransom was filled with a sense of crazy irrelevance. Here were two human beings, thrown
together in an alien world under conditions of inconceivable strangeness; the one separated from his
space-ship, the other newly released from the threat of instant death. Was it sane-was it imaginable-that
they should find themselves at once engaged in a philosophical argument which might just as well have
occurred in a Cambridge combination room? Yet that, apparently, was what Weston insisted upon. He
showed no interest in the fate of his space-ship; he even seemed to feel no curiosity about Ransom's
presence on Venus. Could it be that he had travelled more than thirty million miles of space in search ofconversation?
But as he went on talking. Ransom felt himself more and more in the presence of a
monomaniac. Like an actor who cannot think of anything but his celebrity, or a lover who can think of
nothing but his mistress, tense, tedious, and unescapable, the scientist pursued his fixed idea.
"The tragedy of my life," he said, "and indeed of the modem intellectual world in general, is the rigid
specialisation of knowledge entailed by the growing complexity of what is known. It is my own share in
that tragedy that an early devotion to physics has prevented me from paying any proper attention to
Biology until I reached the fifties. To do myself justice, I should make it clear that the false humanist
ideal of knowledge as an end in itself never appealed to me. I always wanted to know in order to achieve
utility. At first, that utility naturally appeared to me in a personal form-I wanted scholarships, an income,
and that generally recognised position in the world without which a man has no leverage. When those
were attained, I began to look farther: to the utility of the human race!"
He paused as he rounded his period and Ransom nodded to him to proceed.
"The utility of the human race," continued Weston, "in the long run depends rigidly on the possibility of
interplanetary, and even inter-sidereal, travel. That problem I solved. The key of human destiny was
placed in my hands. It would be unnecessary-and painful to us both-to remind you how it was wrenched
from me in Malacandra by a member of a hostile intelligent species whose existence, I admit, I had not
anticipated."
"Not hostile exactly," said Ransom, "but go on." "The rigours of our return journey from Malacandra led
to a serious breakdown in my health--" "Mine too," said Ransom. Weston looked somewhat taken aback
at the interruption and went on. "During my convalescence I had that leisure for reflection which I had
denied myself for many years. In particular I reflected on the objections you had felt to that liquidation
of the non-human inhabitants of Malacandra which was, of course, the necessary preliminary to its
occupation by our own species. The traditional and, if I may say so, the humanitarian form in which you
advanced those objections had till then concealed from me their true strength. That strength I now began
to perceive. I began to see that my own exclusive devotion to human utility was really based on an
unconscious dualism."
"What do you mean?"
"I mean that all my life I had been making a wholly unscientific dichotomy or antithesis between Man
and Nature-had conceived myself fighting for Man against his non-human environment. During my
illness I plunged into Biology, and particularly into what may be called biological philosophy. Hitherto,
as a physicist, I had been content to regard Life as a subject outside my scope. The conflicting views of
those who drew a sharp line between the organic and the inorganic and those who held that what we call
Life was inherent in matter from the very beginning had not interested me. Now it did. I saw almost at
once that I could admit no break, no discontinuity, in the unfolding of the cosmic process. I became a
convinced believer in emergent evolution. All is one. The stuff of mind, the unconsciously purposive
dynamism, is present from the very beginning."
Here he paused. Ransom had heard this sort of thing pretty often before and wondered when his
companion was coming to the point. When Weston resumed it was with an even deeper solemnity of
tone.
"The majestic spectacle of this blind, inarticulate purposive-ness thrusting its way upward and ever
upward in an endless unity of differentiated achievements towards an ever-increasing complexity of
organisation, towards spontaneity and spirituality, swept away all my old conception of a duty to Man as
such. Man in himself is nothing. The forward movements of Life- the growing spirituality-is everything.
I say to you quite freely. Ransom, that I should have been wrong in liquidating the Malacandrians. It was
a mere prejudice that made me prefer our own race to theirs. To spread spirituality, not to spread the
human race, is henceforth my mission. This sets the coping-stone on my career. I worked first for
myself, then for science; then for humanity; but now at last for Spirit itself -I might say, borrowing
language which will be more familiar to you, the Holy Spirit." "Now what exactly do you mean by
that?" asked Ransom.
"I mean," said Weston, "that nothing now divides you and me except a few outworn theological
technicalities with which organised religion has unhappily allowed itself to get incrusted. But I have
penetrated that crust. The Meaning beneath it is as true and living as ever. If you will excuse me for
putting it that way, the essential truth of the religious view of life finds a remarkable witness in the fact
that it enabled you, on Malacandra, to grasp, in your own mythical and imaginative fashion, a truth
which was hidden from me."
"I don't know much about what people call the religious view of life," said Ransom, wrinkling his brow.
"You see, I'm a Christian. And what we mean by the Holy Ghost is not a blind, inarticulate
purposiveness."
"My dear Ransom," said Weston, "I understand you perfectly. I have no doubt that my phraseology will
seem strange to you, and perhaps even shocking. Early and revered associations may have put it out of
your power to recognise in this new form the very same truths which religion has so long preserved and
which science is now at last re-discovering. But whether you can see it or not, believe me, we are talking
about exactly the same thing."
"I'm not at all sure that we are."
"That, if you will permit me to say so, is one of the real weaknesses of organised religion-that adherence
to formulae, that failure to recognise one's own friends. God is a spirit. Ransom. Get hold of that. You're
familiar with that already. Stick to it. God is a spirit."
"Well, of course. But what then?"
"What then? Why, spirit-mind-freedom-spontaneity- that's what I'm talking about. That is the goal
towards which the whole cosmic process is moving. The final disengagement of that freedom, that
spirituality, is the work-to which I dedicate my own life and the life of humanity. The goal. Ransom, the
goal: think of it! Pure spirit: the final vortex of self-thinking, self-originating activity."
"Final?" said Ransom. "You mean it doesn't yet exist?"
"Ah," said Weston, "I see what's bothering you. Of course I know. Religion pictures it as being there
from the beginning. But surely that is not a real difference? To make it one, would be to take time too
seriously. When it has once been attained, you might then say it had been at the beginning just as well as
at the end. Time is one of the things it will transcend."
"By the way," said Ransom, "is it in any sense at all personal -is it alive?"
An indescribable expression passed over Weston's face. He moved a little nearer to Ransom and began
speaking in a lower voice.
"That's what none of them understand," he said. It was such a gangster's or a schoolboy's whisper and so
unlike his usual orotund lecturing style that Ransom for a moment felt a sensation almost of disgust.
"Yes," said Weston, "I couldn't have believed, myself, till recently. Not a person, of course.
Anthropomorphism is one of the childish diseases of popular religion" (here he had resumed his public
manner), "but the opposite extreme of excessive abstraction has perhaps in the aggregate proved more
disastrous. Call it a Force. A great, inscrutable Force, pouring up into us from the dark bases of being. A
Force that can choose its instruments. It is only lately. Ransom, that I've learned from actual experience
something which you have believed all your life as part of your religion." Here he suddenly subsided
again into a whisper-a croaking whisper unlike his usual voice. "Guided," he said. "Chosen. Guided. I've
become conscious that I'm a man set apart. Why did I do physics? Why did I discover the Weston rays?
Why did I go to Malacandra? It-the Force-has pushed me on all the time. I'm being guided. I know now
that I am the greatest scientist the world has yet produced. I've been made so for a purpose. It is through
me that Spirit itself is at this moment pushing on to its goal."
"Look here," said Ransom, "one wants to be careful about this sort of thing. There are spirits and spirits,
you know."
"Eh?" said Weston. "What are you talking about?" "I mean a thing might be a spirit and not good for
you." "But I thought you agreed that Spirit was the good-the end of the whole process? I thought you
religious people were all out for spirituality? What is the point of asceticism-fasts and celibacy and all
that? Didn't we agree that God is a spirit? Don't you worship Him because He is pure spirit?"
"Good heavens, no! We worship Him because He is wise and good. There's nothing specially fine about
simply being a spirit. The Devil is a spirit."
"Now your mentioning the Devil is very interesting," said Weston, who had by this time quite recovered
his normal manner. "It is a most interesting thing in popular religion, this tendency to fissiparate, to
breed pairs of opposites: heaven and hell. God and Devil. I need hardly say that in my view no real
dualism in the universe is admissible; and on that ground I should have been disposed, even a few weeks
ago, to reject these pairs of doublets as pure mythology. It would have been a profound error. The cause
of this universal religious tendency is to be sought much deeper. The doublets are really portraits of
Spirit, of cosmic energy-self-portraits, indeed, for it is the Life-Force itself which has deposited them in
our brains."
"What on earth do you mean?" said Ransom. As he spoke he rose to his feet and began pacing to and
fro. A quite appalling weariness and malaise had descended upon him.
" Your Devil and your God," said Weston, "are both pictures of the same Force. Your heaven is a picture
of the perfect spirituality ahead; your hell a picture of the urge or nisus which is driving us on to it from
behind. Hence the static peace of the one and the fire and darkness of the other. The next stage of
emergent evolution, beckoning us forward, is God; the transcended stage behind, ejecting us, is the
Devil. Your own religion, after all, says that the devils are fallen angels."
"And you are saying precisely the opposite, as far as I can make out-that angels are devils who've risen
in the world." "It comes to the same thing," said Weston.
There was another long pause. "Look here," said Ransom, "it's easy to misunderstand one another on a
point like this. What you are saying sounds to me like the most horrible mistake a man could fall into.
But that may be because in the effort to accommodate it to my supposed 'religious views', you're saying
a good deal more than you mean. It's only a metaphor, isn't it, all this about spirits and forces? I expect
all you really mean is that you feel it your duty to work for the spread of civilisation and knowledge and
that kind of thing." He had tried to keep out of his voice the involuntary anxiety which he had begun to
feel. Next moment he recoiled in horror at the cackling laughter, almost an infantile or senile laughter,
with which Weston replied.
"There you go, there you go," he said. "Like all you religious people. You talk and talk about these
things all your life, and the moment you meet the reality you get frightened."
"What proof," said Ransom (who indeed did feel frightened), "what proof have you that you are being
guided or supported by anything except your own individual mind and other people's books?"
"You didn't notice, dear Ransom," said Weston, "that I'd improved a bit since we last met in my
knowledge of extraterrestrial language. You are a philologist, they tell me." Ransom started. "How did
you do it?" he blurted out. "Guidance, you know, guidance," croaked Weston. He was squatting at the
roots of his tree with his knees drawn up, and his face, now the colour of putty, wore a fixed and even
slightly twisted grin. "Guidance. Guidance," he went on. "Things coming into my head. I'm being
prepared all the time. Being made a fit receptacle for it."
"That ought to be fairly easy," said Ransom impatiently. "If this Life-Force is something so ambiguous
that God and the Devil are equally good portraits of it, I suppose any receptacle is equally fit, and
anything you can do is equally an expression of it."
"There's such a thing as the main current," said Weston. "It's a question of surrendering yourself to thatmaking
yourself the conductor of the live, fiery, central purpose- becoming the very finger with which it
reaches forward."
"But I thought that was the Devil aspect of it, a moment ago."
"That is the fundamental paradox. The thing we are reaching forward to is what you would call God.
The reaching forward, the dynamism, is what people like you always call the Devil. The people like me,
who do the reaching forward, are always martyrs. You revile us, and by us come to your goal."
"Does that mean in plainer language that the things the Force wants you to do are what ordinary people
call diabolical?"
"My dear Ransom, I wish you would not keep relapsing on to the popular level. The two things are only
moments in the single, unique reality. The world leaps forward through great men and greatness always
transcends mere moralism. When the leap has been made our 'diabolism' as you would call it becomes
the morality of the next stage; but while we are making it, we are called criminals, heretics,
blasphemers..."
"How far does it go? Would you still obey the Life-Force if you found it prompting you to murder me?"
"Yes."
"Or to sell England to the Germans?" "Yes."
"Or to print lies as serious research in a scientific periodical?" "Yes."
"God help you!" said Ransom.
"You are still wedded to your conventionalities," said Wes-ton. "Still dealing in abstractions. Can you
not even conceive a total commitment-a commitment to something which utterly overrides all our petty
ethical pigeon-holes?"
Ransom grasped at the straw. "Wait, Weston," he said abruptly. "That may be a point of contact. You
say it's a total commitment. That is, you're giving up yourself. You're not out for your own advantage.
No, wait half a second. This is the point of contact between your morality and mine. We both
acknowledge-"
"Idiot," said Weston. His voice was almost a howl and he had risen to his feet. "Idiot," he repeated. "Can
you understand nothing? Will you always try to press everything back into the miserable framework of
your old jargon about self and self-sacrifice? That is the old accursed dualism in another form. There is
no possible distinction in concrete thought between me and the universe. In so far as I am the conductor
of the central forward pressure of the universe, I am it. Do you see, you timid, scruple-mongering fool? I
am the Universe. I, Weston, am your God and your Devil. I call that Force into me completely. .. ."
Then horrible things began happening. A spasm like that preceding a deadly vomit twisted Weston's face
out of recognition. As it passed, for one second something like the old Weston reappeared-the old
Weston, staring with eyes of horror and howling, "Ransom, Ransom! For Christ's sake don't let them--"
and instantly his whole body spun round as if he had been hit by a revolver bullet and he fell to the earth,
and was there rolling at Ransom's feet, slavering and chattering and tearing up the moss by handfuls.
Gradually the convulsions decreased. He lay still, breathing heavily, his eyes open but without
expression. Ransom was kneeling beside him now. It was obvious that the body was alive, and Ransom
wondered whether this were a stroke or an epileptic fit, for he had never seen either. He rummaged
among the packages and found a bottle of brandy which he uncorked and applied to the patient's mouth.
To his consternation the teeth opened, closed on the neck of the bottle and bit it through. No glass was
spat out. "0 God, I've killed him," said Ransom. But beyond a spurt of blood at the lips there was no
change in his appearance. The face suggested that either he was in no pain or in a pain beyond all human
comprehension. Ransom rose at last, but before doing so he plucked the revolver from Weston's belt,
then, walking down to the beach, he threw it as far as he could into the sea.
He stood for some moments gazing out upon the bay and undecided what to do. Presently he turned and
climbed up the turfy ridge that bordered the little valley on his left hand. He found himself on a fairly
level upland with a good view of the sea, now running high and teased out of its level gold into a
continually changing pattern of lights and shadows. For a second or two he could catch no sight of the
islands. Then suddenly their tree-tops appeared, hanging high up against the sky, and widely separated.
The weather, apparently, was already driving them apart-and even as he thought this they vanished once
more into some unseen valley of the waves. What was his chance, he wondered, of ever finding them
again? A sense of loneliness smote him, and then a feeling of angry frustration. If Weston were dying, or
even if Weston were to live, imprisoned here with him on an island they could not leave, what had been
the danger he was sent to avert from Perelandra? And so, having begun to think of himself, he realised
that he was hungry. He had seen neither fruit nor gourd on the Fixed Land. Perhaps it was a death trap.
He smiled bitterly at the folly which had made him so glad, that morning, to exchange those floating
paradises, where every grove dropped sweetness, for this barren rock. But perhaps it was not barren after
all. Determined, despite the weariness which was every moment descending upon him, to make a search
for food, he was just turning inland when the swift changes of colour that announce the evening of that
world overtook him. Uselessly he quickened his pace. Before he had got down into the valley, the grove
where he had left Weston was a mere cloud of darkness. Before he had reached it he was in seamless,
undimensioned night. An effort or two to grope his way to the place where Weston's stores had been
deposited only served to abolish his sense of direction altogether. He sat down perforce. He called
Weston's name aloud once or twice but, as he expected, received no answer. 'I'm glad I removed his gun,
all the same,' thought Ransom; and then, 'Well, qui dort dine.. and I suppose I must make the best of it
till the morning.' When he lay down he discovered that the solid earth and moss of the Fixed Land was
very much less comfortable than the surfaces to which he had lately been accustomed. That, and the
thought of the other human being lying, no doubt, close at hand with open eyes and teeth clenched on
splintered glass, and the sullen recurring pound of breakers on the beach, all made the night comfortless.
"If I lived on Perelandra," he muttered, "Maleldil wouldn't need to forbid this island. I wish I'd never set
eyes on it."
HE woke, after a disturbed and dreamful sleep, in full daylight. He had a dry mouth, a crick in his neck,
and a soreness in his limbs. It was so unlike all previous wakings in the world of Venus, that for a
moment he supposed himself back on Earth:
and the dream (for so it seemed to him) of having lived and walked on the oceans of the Morning Star
rushed through his memory with a sense of lost sweetness that was well-nigh unbearable. Then he sat up
and the facts came back to him. 'It's jolly nearly the same as having waked from a dream, though,' he
thought. Hunger and thirst became at once his dominant sensations, but he conceived it a duty to look
first at the sick man-though with very little hope that he could help him. He gazed round. There was the
grove of silvery trees all right, but he could not see Weston. Then he glanced at the bay;
there was no punt either. Assuming that in the darkness he had blundered into the wrong valley, he rose
and approached the stream for a drink. As he lifted his face from the water with a long sigh of
satisfaction, his eyes suddenly fell on a little wooden box-and then beyond it on a couple of tins. His
brain was working rather slowly and it took him a few seconds to realise that he was in the right valley
after all, and a few more to draw conclusions from the fact that the box was open and empty, and that
some of the stores had been removed and others left behind. But was it possible that a man in Weston's
physical condition could have recovered sufficiently during the night to strike camp and to go away
laden with some kind of pack? Was it possible that any man could have faced a sea like that in a
collapsible punt? It was true, as he now noticed for the first time, that the storm (which had been a mere
squall by Perelandrian standards) appeared to have blown itself out during the night; but there was still a
quite formidable swell and it seemed out of the question that the Professor could have left the island.
Much more probably he had left the valley on foot and carried the punt with him. Ransom decided that
he must find Weston at once: he must keep in touch with his enemy. For if Weston had recovered, there
was no doubt he meant mischief of some kind. Ransom was not at all certain that he had understood all
his wild talk on the previous day; but what he did understand he disliked very much, and suspected that
this vague mysticism about 'spirituality' would turn out to be something even nastier than his old and
comparatively simple programme of planetary imperialism. It would be unfair to take seriously the
things the man had said immediately before his seizure, no doubt; but there was enough without that.
The next few hours Ransom passed in searching the island for food and for Weston. As far as food was
concerned, he was rewarded. Some fruit like bilberries could be gathered in handfuls on the upper
slopes, and the wooded valleys abounded in a kind of oval nut. The kernel had a toughly soft
consistency, rather like cork or kidneys, and the flavour, though somewhat austere and prosaic after the
fruit of the floating islands, was not unsatisfactory. The giant mice were as tame as other Perelandrian
beasts but seemed stupider. Ransom ascended to the central plateau. The sea was dotted with islands in
every direction, rising and falling with the swell, and all separated from one another by wide stretches of
water. His eye at once picked out an orange-coloured island, but he did not know whether it was that on
which he had been living, for he saw at least two others in which the same colour predominated. At one
time he counted twenty-three floating islands in all. That, he thought, was more than the temporary
archipelago had contained, and allowed him to hope that any one of those he saw might hide the King-or
that the King might even at this moment be re-united to the Lady. Without thinking it out very clearly,
he had come to rest almost all his hopes on the King.
Of Weston he could find no trace. It really did seem, in spite of all improbabilities, that he had somehow
contrived to leave the Fixed Island; and Ransom's anxiety was very great. What Weston, in his new vein,
might do, he had no idea. The best to hope for was that he would simply ignore the master and mistress
of Perelandra as mere savages or 'natives'.
Late in the day, being tired, he sat down on the shore. There was very little swell now and the waves,
just before they broke, were less than knee-deep. His feet, made soft by the mattress-like surface which
one walks on in those floating islands, were hot and sore. Presently he decided to refresh them by a little
wading. The delicious quality of the water drew him out till he was waist-deep. As he stood there, deep
in thought, he suddenly perceived that what he had taken to be an effect of light on the water was really
the back of one of the great silvery fish. 'I wonder would it let me ride it?' he thought; and then,
watching how the beast nosed towards him and kept itself as near the shallows as it dared, it was borne
in upon him that it was trying to attract his attention. Could it have been sent} The thought had no
sooner darted through his mind than he decided to make the experiment. He laid his hand across the
creature's back, and it did not flinch from his touch. Then with some difficulty he scrambled into a
sitting position across the narrow part behind its head, and while he was doing this it remained as nearly
stationary as it could; but as soon as he was firmly in the saddle it whisked itself about and headed for
the sea.
If he had wished to withdraw, it was very soon impossible to do so. Already the green pinnacles of the
mountain, as he looked back, had withdrawn their summits from the sky and the coastline of the island
had begun to conceal its bays and nesses. The breakers were no longer audible-only the prolonged
sibilant or chattering noises of the water about him. Many floating islands were visible, though seen
from this level they were mere feather silhouettes. But the fish seemed to be heading for none of these.
Straight on, as if it well knew its way, the beat of the great fins carried him for more than an hour. Then
green and purple splashed the whole world, and after that darkness.
Somehow he felt hardly any uneasiness when he found himself swiftly climbing and descending the low
hills of water through tile black night. And here it was not all black. The heavens had vanished, and the
surface of the sea; but far, far below him in the heart of the vacancy through which he appeared to be
travelling, strange bursting star shells and writhing streaks of a bluish-green luminosity appeared. At
first they were very remote, but soon, as far as he could judge, they were nearer. A whole world of
phosphorescent creatures seemed to be at play not far from the surface-coiling eels and darting things in
complete armour, and then heraldically fantastic shapes to which the sea-horse of our own waters would
be commonplace. They were all round him-twenty or thirty of them often in sight at once. And mixed
with all this riot of sea-centaurs and sea-dragons he saw yet stranger forms:
fishes, if fishes they were, whose forward part was so nearly human in shape that when he first caught
sight of them he thought he had fallen into a dream and shook himself to awake. But it was no dream.
had first supposed. What had for a moment concealed it from him was the total absence of human
expression. Yet the faces were not idiotic, they were not even brutal parodies of humanity like those of
our terrestrial apes. They were more like human faces asleep, or faces in which humanity slept while
some other life, neither bestial nor diabolic, but merely elvish, out of our orbit, was irrelevantly awake.
He remembered his old suspicion that what was myth in one world might always be fact in some other.
He wondered also whether the King and Queen of Perelandra, though doubtless the first human pair of
this planet, might on the physical side have a marine ancestry. And if so, what then of the man-like
things before men in our own world? Must they in truth have been the wistful brutalities whose pictures
we see in popular books on evolution? Or were the old myths truer than the modern myths? Had there in
truth been a time when satyrs danced in the Italian woods? But he said 'Hush' to his mind at this stage,
for the mere pleasure of breathing in the fragrance which now began to steal towards him from the
blackness ahead. Warm and sweet, and every moment sweeter and purer, and every moment stronger
and more filled with all delights, it came to him. He knew well what it was. He would know it
henceforward out of the whole universe-the night breath of a floating island in the star Venus. It was
strange to be filled with homesickness for places where his sojourn had been so brief and which were, by
any objective standard, so alien to all our race. Or were they? The cord of longing which drew him to the
invisible isle seemed to him at that moment to have been fastened long, long before his coming to
Perelandra, long before the earliest times that memory could recover in his childhood, before his birth,
before the birth of man himself, before the origins of time. It was sharp, sweet, wild, and holy, all in one,
and in any world where men's nerves have ceased to obey their central desires would doubtless have
been aphrodisiac too, but not in Perelandra. The fish was no longer moving. Ransom put out his hand.
He found he was touching weed. He crawled forward over the head of the monstrous fish, and levered
himself on to the gently moving surface of the island. Short as his absence from such places had been,
his earth-trained habits of walking had reasserted themselves, and he fell more than once as he groped
his way on the heaving lawn. But it did not harm falling here; good luck to it! There were trees all about
him in the dark and when a smooth, cool, rounded object came away in his hand he put it, unfearing, to
his lips. It was none of the fruits he had tasted before. It was better than any of them. Well might the
Lady say of her world that the fruit you ate at any moment was, at that moment, the best. Wearied with
his day's walking and climbing, and, still more, borne down by absolute satisfaction, he sank into
dreamless sleep.
He felt that it was several hours later when he awoke and found himself still in darkness. He knew, too,
that he had been suddenly waked: and a moment later he was listening to the sound that had waked him.
It was the sound of voices-a man's voice and a woman's in earnest conversation. He judged that they
were very close to him-for in a Perelandrian night an object is no more visible six inches than six miles
away. He perceived at once who the speakers were: but the voices sounded strange, and the emotions of
the speakers were obscure to him, with no facial expression to eke them out.
"I am wondering," said the woman's voice, "whether all the people of your world have the habit of
talking about the same thing more than once. I have said already that we are forbidden to dwell on the
Fixed Land. Why do you not either talk of something else or stop talking?"
"Because this forbidding is such a strange one," said the man's voice. "And so unlike the ways of
Maleldil in my world. And He has not forbidden you to think about dwelling on the Fixed Land."
"That would be a strange thing-to think about what will never happen."
"Nay, in our world we do it all the time. We put words together to mean things that have never happened
and places that never were: beautiful words, well put together. And then tell them to one another. We
call it stories or poetry. In that old world you spoke of, Malacandra, they did the same. It is for mirth and
wonder and wisdom." "What is the wisdom in it?" "Because the world is made up not only of what is but
of what might be. Maleldil knows both and wants us to know both."
"This is more than I ever thought of. The other-the Piebald one-has already told me things which made
me feel like a tree whose branches were growing wider and wider apart. But this goes beyond all.
Stepping out of what is into what might be and talking and making things out there . . . alongside the
world. I will ask the King what he thinks of it."
"You see, that is what we always come back to. If only you had not been parted from the King."
"Oh, I see. That also is one of the things that might be. The world might be so made that the King and I
were never parted."
"The world would not have to be different-only the way you live. In a world where people live on the
Fixed Lands they do not become suddenly separated." "But you remember we are not to live on the
Fixed Land." "No, but He has never forbidden you to think about it. Might not that be one of the reasons
why you are forbidden to do it-so that you may have a Might Be to think about, to make Story about as
we call it?"
"I will think more of this. I will get the King to make me older about it."
"How greatly I desire to meet this King of yours! But in the matter of Stories he may be no older than
you himself."
"That saying of yours is like a tree with no fruit. The King is always older than I, and about all things."
"But Piebald and I have already made you older about certain matters which the King never mentioned
to you. That is the new good which you never expected. You thought you would always learn all things
from the King; but now Maleldil has sent you other men whom it had never entered your mind to think
of and they have told you things the King himself could not know."
"I begin to see now why the King and I were parted at this time. This is a strange and great good He
intended for me."
"And if you refused to learn things from me and keep on saying you would wait and ask the King, would
that not be like turning away from the fruit you had found to the fruit you had expected?"
"These are deep questions. Stranger. Maleldil is not putting much into my mind about them."
"Do you not see why?"
"No."
"Since Piebald and I have come to your world we have put many things into your mind which Maleldil
has not. Do you not see that He is letting go of your hand a little?"
"How could He? He is wherever we go."
"Yes, but in another way. He is making you older-making you to learn things not straight from Him but
by your own meetings with other people and your own questions and thoughts."
"He is certainly doing that."
"Yes. He is making you a full woman, for up till now you were only half made-like the beasts who do
nothing of themselves. This time, when you meet the King again, it is you who will have things to tell
him. It is you who will be older than he and who will make him older."
"Maleldil would not make a thing like that happen. It would be like a fruit with no taste."
"But it would have a taste for him. Do you not think the King must sometimes be tired of being the
older? Would he not love you more if you were wiser than he?"
"Is this what you call a Poetry or do you mean that it really is?"
"I mean a thing that really is."
"But how could anyone love anything more? It is like saying a thing could be bigger than itself."
"I only meant you could become more like the women of my world."
"What are they like?"
"They are of a great spirit. They always reach out their hands for the new and unexpected good, and see
that it is good long before the men understand it. Their minds run ahead of what Maleldil has told them.
They do not need to wait for Him to tell them what is good, but know it for themselves as He does. They
are, as it were, little Maleldils. And because of their wisdom, their beauty is as much greater than yours
as the sweetness of these gourds surpasses the taste of water. And because of their beauty the love which
the men have for them is as much greater than the King's love for you as the naked burning of Deep
Heaven seen from my world is more wonderful than the golden roof of yours."
"I wish I could see them."
"I wish you could."
"How beautiful is Maleldil and how wonderful are all His works: perhaps He will bring out of me
daughters as much greater than I as I am greater than the beasts. It will be better than I thought. I had
thought I was to be always Queen and Lady. But I see now that I may be as the eldila. I may be
appointed to cherish when they are small and weak children who will grow up and overtop me and at
whose feet I shall fall. I see it is not only questions and thoughts that grow out wider and wider like
branches. Joy also widens out and comes where we had never thought."
"I will sleep now," said the other voice. As it said this it became, for the first time, unmistakably the
voice of Weston- and of Weston disgruntled and snappish. Up till now Ransom, though constantly
resolving to join the conversation, had been kept silent in a kind of suspense between two conflicting
states of mind. On the one hand he was certain, both from the voice and from many of the things it said,
that the male speaker was Weston. On the other hand, the voice, divided from the man's appearance,
sounded curiously unlike itself. Still more, the patient persistent manner in which it was used was very
unlike the Professor's usual alternation between pompous lecturing and abrupt bullying. And how could
a man fresh from such a physical crisis as he had seen Weston undergo have recovered such mastery of
himself in a few hours? And how could he have reached the floating island? Ransom had found himself
throughout their dialogue confronted with an intolerable contradiction. Something which was and was
not Weston was talking: and the sense of this monstrosity, only a few feet away in the darkness, had sent
thrills of exquisite horror tingling along his spine, and raised questions in his mind which he tried to
dismiss as fantastic. Now that the conversation was over he realised, too, with what intense anxiety he
had followed it. At the same moment he was conscious of a sense of triumph. But it was not he who was
triumphant. The whole darkness about him rang with victory. He started and half raised himself. Had
there been any actual sound? Listening hard he could hear nothing but the low murmurous noise of
warm wind and gentle swell. The suggestion of music must have been from within. But as soon as he lay
down again he felt assured that it was not. From without, most certainly from without, but not by the
sense of hearing, festal revelry and dance and splendour poured into him-no sound, yet in such fashion
that it could not be remembered or thought of except as music. It was like having a new sense. It was
like being present when the morning stars sang together. It was as if Perelandra had that moment been
created-and perhaps in some sense it had. The feeling of a great disaster averted was forced upon his
mind, and with it came the hope that there would be no second attempt; and then, sweeter than all, the
suggestion that he had been brought there not to do anything but only as a spectator or a witness. A few
minutes later he was asleep.
THE weather had changed during the night. Ransom sat looking out from the edge of the forest in which
he had slept, on a flat sea where there were no other islands in view. He had waked a few minutes before
and found himself lying alone in a close thicket of stems that were rather reed-like in character but stout
as those of birch trees and which carried an almost flat roof of thick foliage. From this there hung fruits
as smooth and bright and round as holly-berries, some of which he ate. Then he found his way to open
country near the skirts of the island and looked about him. Neither Weston nor the Lady was in sight,
and he began walking in a leisurely fashion beside the sea. His bare feet sank a little into a carpet of
saffron-coloured vegetation, which covered them with an aromatic dust. As he was looking down at this
he suddenly noticed something else. At first he thought it was a creature of more fantastic shape than he
had yet seen on Perelandra. Its shape was not only fantastic but hideous. Then he dropped on one knee to
examine it. Finally he touched it, with reluctance. A moment later he drew back his hands like a man
who had touched a snake.
It was a damaged animal. It was, or had been, one of the brightly coloured frogs. But some accident had
happened to it. The whole back had been ripped open in a sort of V-shaped gash, the point of the V
being a little behind the head. Something had torn a widening wound backward-as we do in opening an
envelope-along the trunk and pulled it out so far behind the animal that the hoppers or hind legs had
been almost torn off with it. They were so damaged that the frog could not leap. On earth it would have
been merely a nasty sight, but up to this moment Ransom had as yet seen nothing dead or spoiled in
Perelandra, and it was like a blow in the face. It was like the first spasm of well-remembered pain
warning a man who had thought he was cured that his family have deceived him and he is dying after
all. It was like the first lie from the mouth of a friend on whose truth one was willing to stake a thousand
pounds. It was irrevocable. The milk-warm wind blowing over the golden sea, the blues and silvers and
greens of the floating garden, the sky itself-all these had become, in one instant, merely the illuminated
margin of a book whose text was the struggling little horror at his feet, and he himself, in that same
instant, had passed into a state of emotion which he could neither control nor understand. He told
himself that a creature of that kind probably had very little sensation. But it did not much mend matters.
It was not merely pity for pain that had suddenly changed the rhythm of his heart-beats. The thing was
an intolerable obscenity which afflicted him with shame. It would have been better, or so he thought at
that moment, for the whole universe never to have existed than for this one thing to have happened.
Then he decided, in spite of his theoretical belief that it was an organism too low for much pain, that it
had better be killed. He had neither boots nor stone nor stick. The frog proved remarkably hard to kill.
When it was far too late to desist he saw clearly that he had been a fool to make the attempt. Whatever
its sufferings might be he had certainly increased and not diminished them. But he had to go through
with it. The job seemed to take nearly an hour. And when at last the mangled result was quite still and he
went down to the water's edge to wash, he was sick and shaken. It seems odd to say this of a man who
had been on the Somme; but the architects tell us that nothing is great or small save by position.
At last he got up and resumed his walk. Next moment he started and looked at the ground again. He
quickened his pace, and then once more stopped and looked. He stood stock-still and covered his face.
He called aloud upon heaven to break the nightmare or to let him understand what was happening. A
trail of mutilated frogs lay along the edge of the island. Picking his footsteps with care, he followed it.
He counted ten, fifteen, twenty: and the twenty-first brought him to a place where the wood came down
to the water's edge. He went into the wood and came out on the other side. There he stopped dead and
stared. Weston, still clothed but without his pith helmet, was standing about thirty feet away: and as
Ransom watched he was tearing a frog-quietly and almost surgically inserting his forefinger, with its
long sharp nail, under the skin behind the creature's head and ripping it open. Ransom had not noticed
before that Weston had such remarkable nails. Then he finished the operation, threw the bleeding ruin
away, and looked up. Their eyes met.
If Ransom said nothing, it was because he could not speak. He saw a man who was certainly not ill, to
judge from his easy stance and the powerful use he had just been making of his fingers. He saw a man
who was certainly Weston, to judge from his height and build and colouring and features. In that sense
he was quite recognisable. But the terror was that he was also unrecognisable. He did not look like a sick
man: but he looked very like a dead one. The face which he raised from torturing the frog had that
terrible power which the face of a corpse sometimes has of simply rebuffing every conceivable human
attitude one can adopt towards it. The expressionless mouth, the unwinking stare of the eyes, something
heavy and inorganic in the very folds of the cheek, said clearly: 'I have features as you have, but there is
nothing in common between you and me.' It was this that kept Ransom speechless. What could you saywhat
appeal or threat could have any meaning -to that? And now, forcing its way up into consciousness,
thrusting aside every mental habit and every longing not to believe, came the conviction that this, in fact,
was not a man:
that Weston's body was kept, walking and undecaying, in Perelandra by some wholly different kind of
life, and that Weston himself was gone.
It looked at Ransom in silence and at last began to smile. We have all often spoken-Ransom himself had
often spoken- of a devilish smile. Now he realised that he had never taken the words seriously. The
smile was not bitter, nor raging, nor, in an ordinary sense, sinister; it was not even mocking. It seemed to
summon Ransom, with a horrible naiveté of welcome, into the world of its own pleasures, as if all men
were at one in those pleasures, as if they were the most natural thing in the world and no dispute could
ever have occurred about them. It was not furtive, nor ashamed, it had nothing of the conspirator in it. It
did not defy goodness, it ignored it to the point of annihilation. Ransom perceived that he had never
before seen anything but half-hearted and uneasy attempts at evil. This creature was whole-hearted. The
extremity of its evil had passed beyond all struggle into some state which bore a horrible similarity to
innocence. It was beyond vice as the Lady was beyond virtue.
The stillness and the smiling lasted for perhaps two whole minutes: certainly not less. Then Ransom
made to take a step towards the thing, with no very clear notion of what he would do when he reached it.
He stumbled and fell. He had a curious difficulty in getting to his feet again, and when he got to them he
overbalanced and fell for the second time. Then there was a moment of darkness filled with a noise of
roaring express trains. After that the golden sky and coloured waves returned and he knew he was alone
and recovering from a faint. As he lay there, still unable and perhaps unwilling to rise, it came into his
mind that in certain old philosophers and poets he had read that the mere sight of the devils was one of
the greatest among the torments of Hell. It had seemed to him till now merely a quaint fancy. And yet
(as he now saw) even the children know better:
no child would have any difficulty in understanding that there might be a face the mere beholding of
which was final calamity. The children, the poets, and the philosophers were right. As there is one Face
above all worlds merely to see which is irrevocable joy, so at the bottom of all worlds that face is
waiting whose sight alone is the misery from which none who beholds it can recover. And though there
seemed to be, and indeed were, a thousand roads by which a man could walk through the world, there
was not a single one which did not lead sooner or later either to the Beatific or the Miserific Vision. He
himself had, of course, seen only a mask or faint adumbration of it; even so, he was not quite sure that
he would live.
When he was able, he got up and set out to search for the thing. He must either try to prevent it from
meeting the Lady or at least be present when they met. What he could do, he did not know; but it was
clear beyond all evasion that this was what he had been sent for. Weston's body, travelling in a spaceship,
had been the bridge by which something else had invaded Perelandra-whether that supreme and
original evil whom in Mars they call The Bent One, or one of his lesser followers, made no difference.
Ransom was all goose flesh, and his knees kept getting in each other's way. It surprised him that he
could experience so extreme a terror and yet be walking and thinking-as men in war or sickness are
surprised to find how much can be borne. 'It will drive us mad,' It will kill us outright,' we say; and then
it happens and we find ourselves neither mad nor dead, still held to the task.
The weather changed. The plain on which he was walking swelled to a wave of land. The sky grew
paler: it was soon rather primrose than gold. The sea grew darker, almost the colour of bronze. Soon the
island was climbing considerable hills of water. One or twice he had to sit down and rest. After several
hours (for his progress was very slow) he suddenly saw two human figures on what was for the moment
a skyline. Next moment they were out of sight as the country heaved up between them and him. It took
about half an hour to reach them. Weston's body was standing-swaying and balancing itself to meet each
change of the ground in a manner of which the real Weston would have been incapable. It was talking to
the Lady. And what surprised Ransom most was that she continued to listen to it without turning to
welcome him or even to comment on his arrival when he came and sat down beside her on the soft turf.
"It is a great branching out," it was saying. "This making of story or poetry about things that might be
but are not. If you shrink back from it, are you not drawing back from the fruit that is offered you?"
"It is not from the making a story that I shrink back, 0 Stranger," she answered, "but from this one story
that you have put into my head. I can make myself stories about my children or the King. I can make it
that the fish fly and the land beasts swim. But if I try to make the story about living on Fixed Land I do
not know how to make it about Maleldil. For if I make it that He has changed His command, that will
not go. And if I make it that we are living there against His command, that is like making the sky all
black and the water so that we cannot drink it and the air so that we cannot breathe it. But also, I do not
see what is the pleasure of trying to make these things." "To make you wiser, older," said Weston's
body. "Do you know for certain that it will do that?" she asked. "Yes, for certain," it replied. 'That is
how the women of my world have become so great and so beautiful."
"Do not listen to him," broke in Ransom; "send him away. Do not hear what he says, do not think of it."
She turned to Ransom for the first time. There had been some very slight change in her face since he had
last seen her. It was not sad, nor deeply bewildered, but the hint of something precarious had increased.
On the other hand she was clearly pleased to see him, though surprised at his interruption;
and her first words revealed that her failure to greet him at his arrival had resulted from her never having
envisaged the possibility of a conversation between more than two speakers. And throughout the rest of
their talk, her ignorance of the technique of general conversation gave a curious and disquieting quality
to the whole scene. She had no notion of how to glance rapidly from one face to another or to
disentangle two remarks at once. Sometimes she listened wholly to Ransom, sometimes wholly to the
other, but never to both.
"Why do you start speaking before this man has finished, Piebald?" she inquired. "How do they do in
your world where you are many and more than two must often be together? Do they not talk in turns, or
have you an art to understand even when all speak together? I am not old enough for that."
"I do not want you to hear him at all," said Ransom. "He is--" and then he hesitated. 'Bad', 'liar', 'enemy',
none of these words would, as yet, have any meaning for her. Racking his brains he thought of their
previous conversation about the great eldil who had held on to the old good and refused the new one.
Yes; that would be her only approach to the idea of badness. He was just about to speak but it was too
late. Weston's voice anticipated him.
"This Piebald," it said, "does not want you to hear me, because he wants to keep you young. He does not
want you to go on to the new fruits that you have never tasted before." "But how could he want to keep
me younger?" "Have you not seen already," said Weston's body, "that Piebald is one who always shrinks
back from the wave that is coming towards us and would like, if he could, to bring back the wave that is
past? In the very first hour of his talking with you, did he not betray this? He did not know that all was
new since Maleldil became a man and that now all creatures with reason will be men. You had to teach
him this. And when he had learned it he did not welcome it. He was sorry that there would be no more
of the old furry people. He would bring back that old world if he could. And when you asked him to
teach you Death, he would not. He wanted you to remain young, not to learn Death. Was it not he who
first put into your. mind the very thought that it was possible not to desire the wave that Maleldil was
rolling towards us; to shrink so much that you would cut off your arms and legs to prevent it coming?"
"You mean he is so young?"
"He is what in my world we call Bad," said Weston's body. "One who rejects the fruit he is given for the
sake of the fruit he expected or the fruit he found last time."
"We must make him older, then," said the Lady, and though she did not look at Ransom, all the Queen
and Mother in her were revealed to him and he knew that she wished him, and all things, infinitely well.
And he-he could do nothing. His weapon had been knocked out of his hand.
"And will you teach us Death?" said the Lady to Weston's shape, where it stood above her.
"Yes," it said, "it is for this that I came here, that you may have Death in abundance. But you must be
very courageous."
"Courageous. What is that?"
"It is what makes you to swim on a day when the waves are so great and swift that something inside you
bids you to stay on land."
"I know. And those are the best days of all for swimming."
"Yes. But to find Death, and with Death the real oldness and the strong beauty and the uttermost
branching out, you must plunge into things greater than waves."
"Go on. Your words are like no other words that I have ever heard. They are like the bubble breaking on
the tree. They make me think of-of-I do not know what they make me think of."
"I will speak greater words than these; but I must wait till you are older."
"Make me older."
"Lady, Lady," broke in Ransom, "will not Maleldil make you older in His own time and His own way,
and will not that be far better?"
Weston's face did not turn in his direction either at this point or at any other time during the
conversation, but his voice, addressed wholly to the Lady, answered Ransom's interruption.
"You see?" it said. "He himself, though he did not mean nor wish to do so, made you see a few days ago
that Maleldil is beginning to teach you to walk by yourself, without holding you by the hand. That was
the first branching out. When you came to know that, you were becoming really old. And since then
Maleldil has let you learn much-not from His own voice, but from mine. You arc becoming your own.
That is what Maleldil wants you to do. That is why He has let you be separated from the King and even,
in a way, from Himself. His way of making you older is to make you make yourself older. And yet this
Piebald would have you sit still and wait for Maleldil to do it all."
"What must we do to Piebald to make him older?" said the Lady.
"I do not think you can help him till you are older yourself," said the voice of Weston. "You cannot help
anyone yet. You are as a tree without fruit."
"It is very true," said the Lady. "Go on." "Then listen," said Weston's body. "Have you understood that
to wait for Maleldil's voice when Maleldil wishes you to walk on your own is a kind of disobedience?"
"I think I have."
"The wrong kind of obeying itself can be a disobeying."
The Lady thought for a few moments and then clapped her hands. "I see," she said, "I see! Oh, how old
you make me. Before now I have chased a beast for mirth. And it has understood and run away from me.
If it had stood still and let me catch it, that would have been a sort of obeying-but not the best sort."
"You understand very well. When you are fully grown you will be even wiser and more beautiful than
the women of my own world. And you see that it might be so with Maleldil's biddings."
"I think I do not see quite clearly."
"Are you certain that He really wishes to be always obeyed?"
"How can we not obey what we love?"
"The beast that ran away loved you."
"I wonder," said the Lady, "if that is the same. The beast knows very well when I mean it to run away
and when I want it to come to me. But Maleldil has never said to us that any word or work of His was a
jest. How could our Beloved need to jest or frolic as we do? He is all a burning joy and a strength. It is
like thinking that He needed sleep or food."
"No, it would not be a jest. That is only a thing like it, not the thing itself. But could the taking away of
your hand from His-the full growing up-the walking in your own way- could that ever be perfect unless
you had, if only once, seemed to disobey Him?"
"How could one seem to disobey?"
"By doing what He only seemed to forbid. There might be a commanding which He wished you to
break."
"But if He told us we were to break it, then it would be no command. And if He did not, how should we
know?"
"How wise you are growing, beautiful one," said Weston's mouth. "No. If He told you to break what He
commanded, it would be no true command, as you have seen. For you are right. He makes no jests. A
real disobeying, a real branching out, this is what He secretly longs for: secretly, because to tell you
would spoil all."
"I begin to wonder," said the Lady after a pause, "whether you are so much older than I. Surely what you
are saying is like fruit with no taste! How can I step out of His will save into something that cannot be
wished? Shall I start trying not to love Him-or the King-or the beasts? It would be like trying to walk on
water or swim through islands. Shall I try not to sleep or to drink or to laugh? I thought your words had a
meaning. But now it seems they have none. To walk out of His will is to walk into nowhere."
"That is true of all His commands except one."
"But can that one be different?"
"Nay, you see of yourself that it is different. These other commands of His-to love, to sleep, to fill this
world with your children-you see for yourself that they are good. And they are the same in all worlds.
But the command against living on the Fixed Island is not so. You have already learned that He gave no
such command to my world. And you cannot see where the goodness of it is. No wonder. If it were
really good, must He not have commanded it to all worlds alike? For how could Maleldil not command
what was good? There is no good in it. Maleldil. Himself is showing you that, this moment, through
your own reason. It is mere command. It is forbidding for the mere sake of forbidding."
"But why . . .?"
"In order that you may break it. What other reason can there be? It is not good. It is not the same for
other worlds. It stands between you and all settled life, all command of your own days. Is not Maleldil
showing you as plainly as He can that it was set up as a test-as a great wave you have to go over, that
you may become really old, really separate from Him."
"But if this concerns me so deeply, why does He put none of this into my mind? It is all coming from
you. Stranger. There is no whisper, even, of the Voice saying Yes to your words."
"But do you not see that there cannot be? He longs-oh, how greatly He longs-to see His creature become
fully itself, to stand up in its own reason and its own courage even against Him. But how can He tell it to
do this? That would spoil all. Whatever it did after that would only be one more step taken with Him.
This is the one thing of all the things He desires in which He must have no finger. Do you think He is
not weary of seeing nothing but Himself in all that He has made? If that contented Him, why should He
create at all? To find the Other-the thing whose will is no longer His-that is Maleldil's desire."
"If I could but know this--"
"He must not tell you. He cannot tell you. The nearest He can come to telling you is to let some other
creature tell it for Him. And behold. He has done so. Is it for nothing, or without His will, that I have
journeyed through Deep Heaven to teach you what He would have you know but must not teach you
Himself?"
"Lady," said Ransom, "if I speak, will you hear me?" "Gladly, Piebald."
"This man has said that the law against living on the Fixed Island is different from the other Laws,
because it is not the same for all worlds and because we cannot see the goodness in it. And so far he says
well. But then he says that it is thus different in order that you may disobey it. But there might be
another reason." "Say it. Piebald."
"I think He made one law of that kind in order that there might be obedience. In all these other matters
what you call obeying Him is but doing what seems good in your own eyes also. Is love content with
that? You do them, indeed, because they are His will, but not only because they are His will. Where can
you taste the joy of obeying unless He bids you do something for which His bidding is the only reason?
When we spoke last you said that if you told the beasts to walk on their heads, they would delight to do
so. So I know that you understand well what I am saying."
"Oh, brave Piebald," said the Green Lady, "this is the best you have said yet. This makes me older far:
yet it does not feel like the oldness this other is giving me. Oh, how well I see it! We cannot walk out of
Maleldil's will: but He has given us a way to walk out of our will. And there could be no such way
except a command like this. Out of our own will. It is like passing out through the world's roof into Deep
Heaven. All beyond is Love Himself. I knew there was joy in looking upon the Fixed Island and laying
down all thought of ever living there, but I did not till now understand." Her face was radiant as she
spoke, but then a shade of bewilderment crossed it. "Piebald," she said, "if you are so young, as this
other says, how do you know these things?"
"He says I am young, but I say not."
The voice of Weston's face spoke suddenly, and it was louder and deeper than before and less like
Weston's voice.
"I am older than he," it said, "and he dare not deny it. Before the mothers of the mothers of his mother
were conceived, I was already older than he could reckon. I have been with Maleldil in Deep Heaven
where he never came and heard the eternal councils. And in the order of creation I am greater than he,
and before me he is of no account. Is it not so?" The corpse-like face did not even now turn towards him,
but the speaker and the Lady both seemed to wait for Ransom to reply. The falsehood which sprang to
his mind died on his lips. In that air, even when truth seemed fatal, only truth would serve. Licking his
lips and choking down a feeling of nausea, he answered:
"In our world to be older is not always to be wiser."
"Look on him," said Weston's body to the Lady; "consider how white his cheeks have turned and how
his forehead is wet. You have not seen such things before: you will see them more often hereafter. It is
what happens-it is the beginning of what happens-to little creatures when they set themselves against
great ones."
An exquisite thrill of fear travelled along Ransom's spine. What saved him was the face of the Lady.
Untouched by the evil so close to her, removed as it were ten years' journey deep within the region other
own innocence, and by that innocence at once so protected and so endangered, she looked up at the
standing Death above her, puzzled indeed, but not beyond the bounds of cheerful curiosity, and said:
"But he was right. Stranger, about this forbidding. It is you who need to be made older. Can you not
see?"
"I have always seen the whole whereof he sees but the half. It is most true that Maleldil has given you a
way of walking out of your own will-but out of your deepest will."
"And what is that?"
"Your deepest will, at present, is to obey Him-to be always as you are now, only His beast or His very
young child. The way out of that is hard. It was made hard that only the very great, the very wise, the
very courageous should dare to walk in it, to go on-on out of this smallness in which you now livethrough
the dark wave of His forbidding, into the real life. Deep Life, with all its joy and splendour and
hardness."
"Listen, Lady," said Ransom. "There is something he is not telling you. All this that we are now talking
has been talked before. The thing he wants you to try has been tried before. Long ago, when our world
began, there was only. one man and one woman in it, as you and the King are in this. And there once
before he stood, as he stands now, talking to the woman. He had found her alone as he has found you
alone. And she listened, and did the thing Maleldil had forbidden her to do. But no joy and splendour
came of it. What came of it I cannot tell you because you have no image of it in your mind. But all love
was troubled and made cold, and Maleldil's voice became hard to hear so that wisdom grew little among
them; and the woman was against the man and the mother against the child;
and when they looked to eat there was no fruit on their trees, and hunting for food took all their time, so
that their life became narrower, not wider."
"He has hidden the half of what happened," said Weston's corpse-like mouth. "Hardness came out of it
but also splendour. They made with their own hands mountains higher than your Fixed Island. They
made for themselves Floating Islands greater than yours which they could move at will through the
ocean faster than any bird can fly. Because there was not always food enough, a woman could give the
only fruit to her child or her husband and eat death instead-could give them all, as you in your little
narrow life of playing and kissing and riding fishes have never done, nor shall do till you break the
commandment. Because knowledge was harder to find, those few who found it became beautiful and
excelled their fellows as you excel the beasts; and thousands were striving for their love ..."
"I think I will go to sleep now," said the Lady quite suddenly. Up to this point she had been listening to
Weston's body with open mouth and wide eyes, but as he spoke of the women with the thousands of
lovers she yawned, with the unconcealed and unpremeditated yawn of a young cat.
"Not yet," said the other. "There is more.. He has not told you that it was this breaking of the
commandment which brought Maleldil to our world and because of which He was made man. He dare
not deny it."
"Do you say this. Piebald?" asked the Lady.
Ransom was sitting with his fingers locked so tightly that his knuckles were white. The unfairness of it
all was wounding him like barbed wire. Unfair .. . unfair. How could Maleldil expect him to fight
against this, to fight with every weapon taken from him, forbidden to lie and yet brought to places where
truth seemed fatal? It was unfair! A sudden impulse of hot rebellion arose in him. A second later, doubt,
like a huge wave, came breaking over him. How if the enemy were right after all? Felix peccatum Adae.
Even the Church would tell him that good came of disobedience in the end. Yes, and it was true too that
he. Ransom, was a timid creature, a man who shrank back from new and hard things. On which side,
after all, did the temptation lie? Progress passed before his eyes in a great momentary vision: cities,
armies, tall ships, and libraries and fame, and the grandeur of poetry spurting like a fountain out of the
labours and ambitions of men. Who could be certain that Creative Evolution was not the deepest truth?
From all sorts of secret crannies in his own mind whose very existence he had never before suspected,
something wild and heady and delicious began to rise, to pour itself towards the shape of Weston. 'It is a
spirit, it is a spirit,' said this inner voice, 'and you are only a man. It goes on from century to century.
You are only a man..
"Do you say this. Piebald?" asked the Lady a second time.
The spell was broken.
"I will tell you what I say," answered Ransom, jumping to his feet. "Of course good came of it. Is
Maleldil a beast that we can stop His path, or a leaf that we can twist His shape? Whatever you do. He
will make good of it. But not the good He had prepared for you if you had obeyed Him. That is lost for
ever. The first King and first Mother of our world did the forbidden thing, and He brought good of it in
the end. But what they did was not good, and what they lost we have not seen. And there were some to
whom no good came nor ever will come." He turned to the body of Weston. "You," he said, "tell her all.
What good came to you? Do you rejoice that Maleldil became a man? Tell her of your joys, and of what
profit you had when you made Maleldil and death acquainted."
In the moment that followed this speech two things happened that were utterly unlike terrestrial
experience. The body that had been Weston's threw up its head and opened its mouth and gave a long
melancholy howl like a dog; and the Lady lay down, wholly unconcerned, and closed her eyes and was
instantly asleep. And while these two things were happening the piece of ground on which the two men
stood and the woman lay was rushing down a great hillside of water.
Ransom kept his eyes fixed upon the enemy, but it took no notice of him. Its eyes moved like the eyes of
a living man but it was hard to be sure what it was looking at, or whether it really used the eyes as
organs of vision at all. One got the impression of a force that cleverly kept the pupils of those eyes fixed
in a suitable direction while the mouth talked but which, for its own purpose, used wholly different
modes of perception. The thing sat down close to the Lady's head on the far side of her from Ransom. If
you could call it sitting down. The body did not reach its squatting position by the normal movements of
a man:
it was more as if some external force manoeuvred it into the right position and then let it drop. It was
impossible to point to any particular motion which was definitely non-human. Ransom had the sense of
watching an imitation of living motions which had been very well studied and was technically correct:
but somehow it lacked the master touch. And he was chilled with an inarticulate, night-nursery horror of
the thing he had to deal with-the managed corpse, the bogey, the Un-man.
There was nothing to do but to watch: to sit there, for ever if need be, guarding the Lady from the Unman
while then-island climbed interminably over the Alps and Andes of burnished water. All three were
very still. Beasts and birds came often and looked upon them. Hours later the Un-man began to speak. It
did not even look in Ransom's direction;
slowly and cumbrously, as if by some machinery that needed oiling, it made its mouth and lips
pronounce his name. "Ransom," it said. "Well?" said Ransom.
"Nothing," said the Un-man. He shot an inquisitive glance at it. Was the creature mad? But it looked, as
before, dead rather than mad, sitting there with the head bowed and the mouth a little open, and some
yellow dust from the moss settled in the creases of its cheeks, and the legs crossed tailor-wise, and the
hands, with their long metallic-looking nails, pressed flat together on the ground before it. He dismissed
the problem from his mind and returned to his own uncomfortable thoughts.
"Ransom," it said again.
"What is it?" said Ransom sharply.
"Nothing," it answered.
Again there was silence; and again, about a minute later, the horrible mouth said:
"Ransom!" This time he made no reply. Another minute and it uttered his name again; and then, like a
minute gun, "Ransom . . . Ransom . . . Ransom," perhaps a hundred times.
"What the Hell do you want?" he roared at last.
"Nothing," said the voice. Next time he determined not to answer; but when it had called on him about a
thousand times he found himself answering whether he would or no, and "Nothing," came the reply. He
taught himself to keep silent in the end: not that the torture of resisting his impulse to speak was less
than the torture of response but because something with him rose up to combat the tormentor's assurance
that he must yield in the end. If the attack had been of some more violent kind it might have been easier
to resist. What chilled and almost cowed him was the union of malice with something nearly childish.
For temptation, for blasphemy, for a whole battery of horrors, he was in some sort prepared: but hardly
for this petty, indefatigable nagging as of a nasty little boy at a preparatory school. Indeed no imagined
horror could have surpassed the sense which grew within him as the slow hours passed, that this creature
was, by all human standards, inside out-its heart on the surface and its shallowness at the heart. On the
surface, great designs and an antagonism to Heaven which involved the fate of worlds: but deep within,
when every veil had been pierced, was there, after all, nothing but a black puerility, an aimless empty
spitefulness content to sate itself with the tiniest cruelties, as love does not disdain the smallest
kindness? What kept him steady, long after all possibility of thinking about something else had
disappeared, was the decision that if he must hear either the word Ransom or the word Nothing a million
times, he would prefer the word Ransom.
And all the time the little jewel-coloured land went soaring up into the yellow firmament and hung there
a moment and tilted its woods and went racing down into the warm lustrous depths between the waves:
and the Lady lay sleeping with one arm bent beneath her head and her lips a little parted. Sleeping
assuredly-for her eyes were shut and her breathing regular- yet not looking quite like those who sleep in
our world, for her face was full of expression and intelligence, and the limbs looked as if they were
ready at any moment to leap up, and altogether she gave the impression that sleep was not a thing that
happened to her but an action which she performed.
Then all at once it was night. "Ransom ... Ransom .. . Ransom . .. Ransom," went on the voice. And
suddenly it crossed his mind that though he would some time require sleep, the Un-man might not.
SLEEP proved to be indeed the problem. For what seemed a great time, cramped and wearied, and soon
hungry and thirsty as well, he sat still in the darkness trying not to attend to the unflagging repetition of
"Ransom-Ransom-Ransom." But presently he found himself listening to a conversation of which he
knew he had not heard the beginning and realised that he had slept. The Lady seemed to be saying very
little. Weston's voice was speaking gently and continuously. It was not talking about the Fixed Land nor
even about Maleldil. It appeared to be telling, with extreme beauty and pathos, a number of stories, and
at first Ransom could not perceive any connecting link between them. They were all about women, but
women who had apparently lived at different periods of the world's history and in quite different
circumstances. From the Lady's replies it appeared that the stories contained much that she did not
understand; but oddly enough the Un-man did not mind. If the questions aroused by any one story
proved at all difficult to answer, the speaker simply dropped that story and instantly began another. The
heroines of the stories seemed all to have suffered a great deal-they had been oppressed by fathers, cast
off by husbands, deserted by lovers. Their children had risen up against them and society had driven
them out. But the stories all ended, in a sense, happily: sometimes with honours and praises to a heroine
still living, more often with tardy acknowledgment and unavailing tears after her death. As the endless
speech proceeded, the Lady's questions grew always fewer; some meaning for the words Death and
Sorrow- though what kind of meaning Ransom could not even guess- was apparently being created in
her mind by mere repetition. At last it dawned upon him what all these stories were about. Each one of
these women had stood forth alone and braved a terrible risk for her child, her lover, or her people. Each
had been misunderstood, reviled, and persecuted: but each also magnificently vindicated by the event.
The precise details were often not very easy to follow. Ransom had more than a suspicion that many of
these noble pioneers had been what in ordinary terrestrial speech we call witches or perverts. But that
was all in the background. What emerged from the stories was rather an image than an idea-the picture
of the tall, slender form, unbowed though the world's weight rested upon its shoulders, stepping forth
fearless and friendless into the dark to do for others what those others forbade it to do yet needed to have
done. And all the time, as a sort of background to these goddess shapes, the speaker was building up a
picture of the other sex. No word was directly spoken on the subject:
but one felt them there as a huge, dim multitude of creatures pitifully childish and complacently
arrogant; timid, meticulous, unoriginating; sluggish and ox-like, rooted to the earth almost in their
indolence, prepared to try nothing, to risk nothing, to make no exertion, and capable of being raised into
full life only by the unthanked and rebellious virtue of their females. It was very well done. Ransom,
who had little of the pride of sex, found himself for a few moments all but believing it.
In the midst of this the darkness was suddenly torn by a flash of lightning; a few seconds later came a
revel of Perelandrian thunder, like the playing of a heavenly tambourine, and after that warm rain.
Ransom did not much regard it. The flash had shown him the Un-man sitting bolt upright, the Lady
raised on one elbow, the dragon lying awake at her head, a grove of trees beyond, and great waves
against the horizon. He was thinking of what he had seen. He was wondering how the Lady could see
that face-those jaws monotonously moving as if they were rather munching than talking-and not know
the creature to be evil. He saw, of course, that this was unreasonable of him. He himself was doubtless
an uncouth figure in her eyes; she could have no knowledge either about evil or about the normal
appearance of terrestrial man to guide her. The expression on her face, revealed in the sudden light, was
one that he had not seen there before. Her eyes were not fixed on the narrator: as far as that went, her
thoughts might have been a thousand miles away. Her lips were shut and a little pursed. Her eyebrows
were slightly raised. He had not yet seen her look so like a woman of our own race; and yet her
expression was one he had not very often met on earth- except, as he realised with a shock, on the stage.
'Like a tragedy queen' was the disgusting comparison that arose in his mind. Of course it was a gross
exaggeration. It was an insult for which he could not forgive himself. And yet... and yet ... the tableau
revealed by the lightning had photographed itself on his brain. Do what he would, he found it impossible
not to think of that new look in her face. A very good tragedy queen, no doubt. The heroine of a very
great tragedy, very nobly played by an actress who was a good woman in real life. By earthly standards,
an expression to be praised, even to be revered: but remembering all that he had read in her countenance
before, the unselfconscious radiance, the frolic sanctity, the depth of stillness that reminded him
sometimes of infancy and sometimes of extreme old age while the hard youth and valiancy of face and
body denied both, he found this new expression horrifying. The fatal touch of invited grandeur, of
enjoyed pathos-the assumption, however slight, of a role- seemed a hateful vulgarity. Perhaps she was
doing no more- he had good hope that she was doing no more-than responding in a purely imaginative
fashion to this new art of Story or Poetry. But by God she'd better not! And for the first time the thought
'This can't go on' formulated itself in his mind.
"I will go where the leaves cover us from the rain," said her voice in the darkness. Ransom had hardly
noticed that he was getting wet-in a world without clothes it is less important. But he rose when he heard
her move and followed her as well as he could by ear. The Un-man seemed to be doing the same. They
progressed in total darkness on a surface as variable as that of water. Every now and then there was
another flash. One saw the Lady walking erect, the Un-man slouching by her side with Weston's shirt
and shorts now sodden and clinging to it, and the dragon puffing and waddling behind. At last they came
to a place where the carpet under their feet was dry and there was a drumming noise of rain on firm
leaves above their heads. They lay down again. "And another time," began the Un-man at once, "there
was a queen in our world who ruled over a little land--"
"Hush!" said the Lady, "let us listen to the rain." Then, after a moment, she added, "What was that? It
was some beast I never heard before"-and indeed, there had been something very like a low growl close
beside them.
"I do not know," said the voice of Weston.
"I think I do," said Ransom.
"Hush!" said the Lady again, and no more was said that night.
This was the beginning of a series of days and nights which Ransom remembered with loathing for the
rest of his life. He had been only too correct in supposing that his enemy required no sleep. Fortunately
the Lady did, but she needed a good deal less than Ransom and possibly, as the days passed, came to
take less than she needed. It seemed to Ransom that whenever he dozed he awoke to find the Un-man
already in conversation with her. He was dead tired. He could hardly have endured it all but for the fact
that their hostess quite frequently dismissed them both from her presence. On such occasions Ransom
kept close to the Un-man. It was a rest from the main battle, but was a very imperfect rest. He did not
dare to let the enemy out of his sight for a moment, and every day its society became more unendurable.
He had full opportunity to learn the falsity of the maxim that the Prince of Darkness is a gentleman.
Again and again he felt that a suave and subtle Mephistopheles with red cloak and rapier and a feather in
his cap, or even a sombre tragic Satan out of Paradise Lost, would have been a welcome release from the
thing he was actually doomed to watch. It was not like dealing with a wicked politician at all: it was
much more like being set to guard an imbecile or a monkey or a very nasty child. What had staggered
and disgusted him when it first began saying, "Ransom . . . Ransom . . ." continued to disgust him every
day and every hour. It showed plenty of subtlety and intelligence when talking to the Lady; but Ransom
soon perceived that it regarded intelligence simply and solely as a weapon, which it had no more wish to
employ in its off-duty hours than a soldier has to do bayonet practice when he is on leave. Thought was
for it a device necessary to certain ends, but thought in itself did not interest it. It assumed reason as
externally and inorganically as it had assumed Weston's body. The moment the Lady was out of sight it
seemed to relapse. A great deal of his time was spent in protecting the animals from it. Whenever it got
out of sight, or even a few yards ahead, it would make a grab at any beast or bird within its reach and
pull out some fur or feathers. Ransom tried whenever possible to get between it and its victim. On such
occasions there were nasty moments when the two stood facing each other. It never came to a fight, for
the Un-man merely grinned and perhaps spat and fell back a little, but before that happened Ransom
usually had opportunity to discover how terribly he feared it. For side by side with his disgust, the more
childlike terror of living with a ghost or a mechanised corpse never left him for many minutes together.
The fact of being alone with it sometimes rushed upon his mind with such dismay that it took all his
reason to resist his longing for society-his impulse to rush madly over the island until he found the Lady
and to beg her protection. When the Un-man could not get animals it was content with plants. It was
fond of cutting their outer rinds through with its nails, or grubbing up roots, or pulling off leaves, or
even tearing up handfuls of turf. With Ransom himself it had innumerable games to play. It had a whole
repertory of obscenities to perform with its own -or rather with Weston's-body: and the mere silliness of
them was almost worse than the dirtiness. It would sit making grimaces at him for hours together; and
then, for hours more, it would go back to its old repetition of "Ransom . . . Ransom." Often its grimaces
achieved a horrible resemblance to people whom Ransom had known and loved in our own world. But
worst of all were those moments when it allowed Weston to come "back into its countenance. Then its
voice, which was always Weston's voice, would begin a pitiful, hesitant mumbling, "You be very
careful. Ransom. I'm down in the bottom of a big black hole. No, I'm not, though. I'm on Perelandra. I
can't think very well now, but that doesn't matter, he does all my thinking for me. It'll get quite easy
presently. That boy keeps on shutting the windows. That's all right, they've taken off my head and put
someone else's on me. I'll soon be all right now. They won't let me see my press cuttings. So then I went
and told him that if they didn't want me in the First Fifteen they could jolly well do without me, see.
We'll tell that young whelp it's an insult to the examiners to show up this kind of work. What I want to
know is why I should pay for a first-class ticket and then be crowded out like this. It's not fair. Not fair. I
never meant any harm. Could you take some of this weight off my chest, I don't want all those clothes.
Let me alone. Let me alone. It's not fair. It's not fair. What enormous bluebottles. They say you get used
to them"-and then it would end in the canine howl. Ransom never could make up his mind whether it
was a trick or whether a decaying psychic energy that had once been Weston were indeed fitfully and
miserably alive within the body that sat there beside him. He discovered that any hatred he had once felt
for the Professor was dead. He found it natural to pray fervently for his soul. Yet what he felt for Weston
was not exactly pity. Up till that moment, whenever he had thought of Hell, he had pictured the lost
souls as being still human; now, as the frightful abyss which parts ghosthood from manhood yawned
before him, pity was almost swallowed up in horror-in the unconquerable revulsion of the life within
him from positive and self-consuming Death. If the remains of Weston were, at such moments, speaking
through the lips of the Un-man, then Weston was not now a man at all. The forces which had begun,
perhaps years ago, to eat away his humanity had now completed their work. The intoxicated will which
had been slowly poisoning the intelligence and the affections had now at last poisoned itself and the
whole psychic organism had fallen to pieces. Only a ghost was left-an everlasting unrest, a crumbling, a
ruin, an odour of decay. 'And this,' thought Ransom, 'might be my destination; or hers.'
But of course the hours spent alone with the Un-man were like hours in a back area. The real business of
life was the interminable conversation between the Tempter and the Green Lady. Taken hour by hour the
progress was hard to estimate;
but as the days passed Ransom could not resist the conviction that the general development was in the
enemy's favour. There were, of course, ups and downs. Often the Un-man was unexpectedly repulsed by
some simplicity which it seemed not to have anticipated. Often, too. Ransom's own contributions to the
terrible debate were for the moment successful. There were times when he thought,' Thank God! We've
won at last.' But the enemy was never tired, and Ransom grew more weary all the time; and presently he
thought he could see signs that the Lady was becoming tired too. In the end he taxed her with it and
begged her to send them both away. But she rebuked him, and her rebuke revealed how dangerous the
situation had already become. "Shall I go and rest and play," she asked, "while all this lies on our hands?
Not till I am certain that there is no great deed to be done by me for the King and for the children of our
children."
It was on those lines that the enemy now worked almost exclusively. Though the Lady had no word for
Duty he had made it appear to her in the light of a Duty that she should continue to fondle the idea of
disobedience, and convinced her that it would be a cowardice if she repulsed him. The idea of the Great
Deed, of the Great Risk, of a kind of martyrdom, were presented to her every day, varied in a thousand
forms. The notion of waiting to ask the King before a decision was made had been unobtrusively
shuffled aside. Any such 'cowardice' was not to be thought of. The whole point of her action- the whole
grandeur-would lie in taking it without the King's knowledge, in leaving him utterly free to repudiate it,
so that all the benefits should be his, and all the risks hers; and with the risk, of course, all the
magnanimity, the pathos, the tragedy, and the originality. And also, the Tempter hinted, it would be no
use asking the King, for he would certainly not approve the action: men were like that. The King must
be forced to be free. Now, while she was on her own-now or never-the noble thing must be achieved;
and with that 'Now or never' he began to play on a fear which the Lady apparently shared with the
women of earth-the fear that life might be wasted, some great opportunity let slip. "How if I were as a
tree that could have borne gourds and yet bore none," she said. Ransom tried to convince her that
children were fruit enough. But the Un-man asked whether this elaborate division of the human race into
two sexes could possibly be meant for no other purpose than offspring?-a matter which might have been
more simply provided for, as it was in many of the plants. A moment later it was explaining that men
like Ransom in his own world-men of that intensely male and backward-looking type who always
shrank away from the new good-had continuously laboured to keep woman down to mere child-bearing
and to ignore the high destiny for which Maleldil had actually created her. It told her that such men had
already done incalculable harm. Let her look to it that nothing of the sort happened on Perelandra. It was
at this stage that it began to teach her many new words: words like Creative and Intuition and Spiritual.
But that was one of its false steps. When she had at last been made to understand what 'creative' meant
she forgot all about the Great Risk and the tragic loneliness and laughed for a whole minute on end.
Finally she told the Unman that it was younger even than Piebald, and sent them both away.
Ransom gained ground over that; but on the following day he lost it all by losing his temper. The enemy
had been pressing on her with more than usual ardour the nobility of self-sacrifice and self-dedication,
and the enchantment seemed to be deepening in her mind every moment, when Ransom, goaded beyond
all patience, had leaped to his feet and really turned upon her, talking far too quickly and almost
shouting, and even forgetting his Old Solar and intermixing English words. He tried to tell her that he'd
seen this kind of 'unselfishness' in action: to tell her of women making themselves sick with hunger
rather than begin the meal before the man of the house returned, though they knew perfectly well that
there was nothing he disliked more; of mothers wearing themselves to a ravelling to marry some
daughter to a man whom she detested;
of Agrippina and of Lady Macbeth. "Can you not see," he shouted, "that he is making you say words
that mean nothing? What is the good of saying you would do this for the King's sake when you know it
is what the King would hate most? Are you Maleldil that you should determine what is good for the
King?" But she understood only a very small part of what he said and was bewildered by his manner.
The Un-man made capital out of this speech.
But through all these ups and downs, all changes of the front line, all counter-attacks and stands and
withdrawals, Ransom came to see more and more clearly the strategy of the whole affair. The Lady's
response to the suggestion of becoming a risk-bearer, a tragic pioneer, was still a response made chiefly
out of her love for the King and for her unborn children, and even, in a sense, of Maleldil Himself. The
idea that He might not really wish to be obeyed to the letter was the sluice through which the whole
flood of suggestion had been admitted to her mind. But mixed with this response, from the moment
when the Un-man began its tragic stories, there was the faintest touch of theatricality, the first hint of a
self-admiring inclination to seize a grand role in the drama of her world. It was clear that the Un-man's
whole effort was to increase this element. As long as this was but one drop, so to speak, in the sea of her
mind, he would not really succeed. Perhaps, while it remained so, she was protected from actual
disobedience: perhaps no rational creature, until such a motive became dominant, could really throw
away happiness for anything quite so vague as the Tempter's chatter about Deeper Life and the Upward
Path. The veiled egoism in the conception of noble revolt must be increased. And Ransom thought,
despite many rallies on her part and many set-backs suffered by the enemy, that it was, very slowly and
yet perceptibly, increasing. The matter was, of course, cruelly complicated. What the Un-man said was
always very nearly true. Certainly it must be part of the Divine plan that this happy creature should
mature, should become more and more a creature of free choice, should become, in a sense, more
distinct from God and from her husband in order thereby to be at one with them in a richer fashion. In
fact, he had seen this very process going on from the moment at which he met her, and had,
unconsciously, assisted it. This present temptation, if conquered, would itself be the next, and greatest,
step in the same direction: an obedience freer, more reasoned, more conscious than any she had known
before, was being put in her power. But for that very reason the fatal false step which, once taken, would
thrust her down into the terrible slavery of appetite and hate and economics and government which our
race knows so well, could be made to sound so like the true one. What made him feel sure that the
dangerous element in her interest was growing was her progressive disregard of the plain intellectual
bones of the problem. It became harder to recall her mind to the data-a command from Maleldil, a
complete uncertainty about the results of breaking it, and a present happiness so great that hardly any
change could be for the better. The turgid swell of indistinctly splendid images which the Un-man
aroused, and the transcendent importance of the central image, carried all this away. She was still in her
innocence. No evil intention had been formed in her mind. But if her will was uncorrupted, half her
imagination was already filled with bright, poisonous shapes. 'This can't go on,' thought Ransom for the
second time. But all his arguments proved in the long run unavailing, and it did go on.
There came a night when he was so tired that towards morning he fell into a leaden sleep and slept far
into the following day. He woke to find himself alone. A great horror came over him. "What could I
have done? What could I have done?" he cried out, for he thought that all was lost. With sick heart and
sore head he staggered to the edge of the island: his idea was to find a fish and to pursue the truants to
the Fixed Land where he felt little doubt that they had gone. In the bitterness and confusion of his mind
he forgot that he had no notion in which direction that land now lay nor how far it was distant. Hurrying
through the woods, he emerged into an open place and suddenly found that he was not alone. Two
human figures, robed to their feet, stood before him, silent under the yellow sky. Their clothes were of
purple and blue, their heads wore chaplets of silver leaves, and their feet were bare. They seemed to him
to be, the one the ugliest, and the other the most beautiful, of the children of man. Then one of them
spoke and he realised that they were none other than the Green Lady herself and the haunted body of
Weston. The robes were of feathers, and he knew well the Perelandrian birds from which they had been
derived; the art of the weaving, if weaving it could be called, was beyond his comprehension.
"Welcome, Piebald," said the Lady. "You have slept long. What do you think of us in our leaves?"
"The birds," said Ransom. "The poor birds! What has he done to them?"
"He has found the feathers somewhere," said the Lady carelessly. "They drop them."
"Why have you done this. Lady?"
"He has been making me older again. Why did you never tell me. Piebald?" "Tell you what?"
"We never knew. This one showed me that the trees have leaves and the beasts have fur, and said that in
your world the men and women also hung beautiful things about them. Why do you not tell us how we
look? Oh, Piebald, Piebald, I hope this is not going to be another of the new goods from which you draw
back your hand. It cannot be new to you if they all do it in your world."
"Ah," said Ransom, "but it is different there. It is cold." "So the Stranger said," she answered. "But not
in all parts of your world. He says they do it even where it is warm." "Has he said why they do it?"
"To be beautiful. Why else?" said the Lady, with some wonder in her face.
'Thank Heaven,' thought Ransom, 'he is only teaching her vanity'; for he had feared something worse.
Yet could it be possible, in the long run, to wear clothes without learning modesty, and through modesty
lasciviousness?
"Do you think we are more beautiful?" said the Lady, interrupting his thoughts.
"No," said Ransom; and then, correcting himself, "I don't know." It was, indeed, not easy to reply. The
Un-man, now that Weston's prosaic shirt and shorts were concealed, looked a more exotic and therefore
a more imaginatively, less squalidly, hideous figure. As for the Lady-that she looked in some way worse
was not doubtful. Yet there is a plainness in nudity-as we speak of 'plain' bread. A sort of richness, a
flamboyancy, a concession, as it were, to lower conceptions of the beautiful, had come with the purple
robe. For the first (and last) time she appeared to him at that moment as a woman whom an earth-born
man might conceivably love. And this was intolerable. The ghastly inappropriateness of the idea had, all
in one moment, stolen something from the colours of the landscape and the scent of the flowers.
"Do you think we are more beautiful?" repeated the Lady. "What does it matter?" said Ransom dully.
"Everyone should wish to be as beautiful as they can," she answered. "And we cannot see ourselves."
"We can," said Weston's body.
"How can this be?" said the Lady, turning to it. "Even if you could roll your eyes right round to look
inside they would see only blackness."
"Not that way," it answered. "I will show you." It walked a few paces away to where Weston's pack lay
in the yellow turf. With that curious distinctness which often falls upon us when we are anxious and
preoccupied Ransom noticed the exact make and pattern of the pack. It must have been from the same
shop in London where he had bought his own: and that little fact, suddenly reminding him that Weston
had once been a man, that he too had once had pleasures and pains and a human mind, almost brought
the tears into his eyes. The horrible fingers which Weston would never use again worked at the buckles
and brought out a small bright object-an English pocket mirror that might have cost three-and-six. He
handed it to the Green Lady. She turned it over in her hands. "What is it? What am I to do with it?" she
said. "Look in it," said the Un-man. "How?"
"Look!" he said. Then taking it from her he held it up to her face. She stared for quite an appreciable
time without apparently making anything of it. Then she started back with a cry and covered her face.
Ransom started too. It was the fast time he had seen her the mere passive recipient of any emotion. The
world about him was big with change. "Oh-oh," she cried. "What is it? I saw a face." "Only your own
face, beautiful one," said the Un-man. "I know," said the Lady, still averting her eyes from the mirror.
"My face-out there-looking at me. Am I growing older or is it something else? I feel... I feel. . . my heart
is beating too hard. I am not warm. What is it?" She glanced from one of them to the other. The
mysteries had all vanished from her face. It was as easy to read as that of a man in a shelter when a
bomb is coming. "What is it?" she repeated.
"It is called Fear," said Weston's mouth. Then the creature turned its face full on Ransom and grinned.
"Fear," she said. "This is Fear," pondering the discovery;
then, with abrupt finality, "I do not like it."
"It will go away," said the Un-man, when Ransom interrupted.
"It will never go away if you do what he wishes. It is into more and more fear that he is leading you."
"It is," said the Un-man, "into the great waves and through them and beyond. Now that you know Fear,
you see that it must be you who shall taste it on behalf of your race. You know the King will not. You do
not wish him to. But there is no cause for fear in this little thing: rather for joy. What is fearful in it?"
"Things being two when they are one," replied the Lady decisively. "That thing" (she pointed at the
mirror) "is me and not me."
"But if you do not look you will never know how beautiful you are."
"It comes into my mind. Stranger," she answered, "that a fruit does not eat itself, and a man cannot be
together with himself."
"A fruit cannot do that because it is only a fruit," said the Un-man. "But we can do it. We call this thing
a mirror. A man can love himself, and be together with himself. That is what it means to be a man or a
woman-to walk alongside oneself as if one were a second person and to delight in one's own beauty.
Mirrors were made to teach this art."
"Is it a good?" said the Lady.
"No," said Ransom.
"How can you find out without trying?" said the Un-man.
"If you try it and it is not good," said Ransom, "how do you know whether you will be able to stop doing
it?"
"I am walking alongside myself already," said the Lady. "But I do not yet know what I look like. If I
have become two I had better know what the other is. As for you. Piebald, one look will show me this
woman's face and why should I look more than once?"
She took the mirror, timidly but firmly, from the Un-man and looked into it in silence for the better part
of a minute. Then she let it sink and stood holding it at her side. "It is very strange," she said at last. "It is
very beautiful," said the Un-man. "Do you not think so?" "Yes."
"But you have not yet found what you set out to find." "What was that? I have forgotten." "Whether the
robe of feathers made you more beautiful or less." "I saw only a face."
"Hold it further away and you will see the whole of the alongside woman-the other who is yourself. Or
no-I will hold it."
The commonplace suggestions of the scene became grotesque at this stage. She looked at herself first
with the robe, then without it, then with it again; finally she decided against it and threw it away. The
Un-man picked it up.
"Will you not keep it?" he said; "you might wish to carry it on some days even if you do not wish for it
on all days." "Keep it?" she asked, not clearly understanding. "I had forgotten," said the Un-man. "I had
forgotten that you would not live on the Fixed Land nor build a house nor in any way become mistress
of your own days. Keeping means putting a thing where you know you can always find it again, and
where rain, and beasts, and other people cannot reach it. I would give you this mirror to keep. It would
be the Queen's mirror, a gift brought into the world from Deep Heaven: the other women would not have
it. But you have reminded me. There can be no gifts, no keeping, no foresight while you live as you dofrom
day to day, like the beasts."
But the Lady did not appear to be listening to him. She stood like one almost dazed with the richness of
a day-dream. She did not look in the least like a woman who is thinking about a new dress. The
expression of her face was noble. It was a great deal too noble. Greatness, tragedy, high sentiment -these
were obviously what occupied her thoughts. Ransom perceived that the affair of the robes and the mirror
had been only superficially concerned with what is commonly called female vanity. The image of her
beautiful body had been offered to her only as a means to awake the far more perilous image of her great
Soul. The external and, as it were, dramatic conception of the self was the enemy's true aim. He was
making her mind a theatre in which that phantom self should hold the stage. He had already written the
play.
BECAUSE he had slept so late that morning Ransom found it easy to keep awake the following night.
The sea had become calm and there was no rain. He sat upright in the darkness with his back against a
tree. The others were close beside him-the Lady, to judge by her breathing, asleep and the Un-man
doubtless waiting to arouse her and resume its solicitations the moment Ransom should doze. For the
third time, more strongly than ever before, it came into his head, 'This can't go on.'
The Enemy was using Third Degree methods. It seemed to Ransom that, but for a miracle, the Lady's
resistance was bound to be worn away in the end. Why did no miracle come? Or rather, why no miracle
on the right side? For the presence of the Enemy was in itself a kind of Miracle. Had Hell a prerogative
to work wonders? Why did Heaven work none? Not for the first time he found himself questioning
Divine Justice. He could not understand why Maleldil should remain absent when the Enemy was there
in person.
But while he was thinking this, as suddenly and sharply as if the solid darkness about him had spoken
with articulate voice, he knew that Maleldil was not absent. That sense-so very welcome yet never
welcomed without the overcoming of a certain resistance-that sense of the Presence which he had once
or twice before experienced on Perelandra, returned to him. The darkness was packed quite full. It
seemed to press upon his trunk so that he could hardly use his lungs: it seemed to close in on his skull
like a crown of intolerable weight so that for a space he could hardly think. Moreover, he became aware
in some indefinable fashion that it had never been absent, that only some unconscious activity of his
own had succeeded in ignoring it for the past few days.
Inner silence is for our race a difficult achievement. There is a chattering part of the mind which
continues, until it is corrected, to chatter on even in the holiest places. Thus, while one part of Ransom
remained, as it were, prostrated in a hush of fear and love that resembled a kind of death, something else
inside him, wholly unaffected by reverence, continued to pour queries and objections into his brain. 'It's
all very well,' said this voluble critic, 'a presence of that sort! But the Enemy is really here, really saying
and doing things. Where is Maleldil's representative?'
The answer which came back to him, quick as a fencer's or a tennis player's riposte, out of the silence
and the darkness, almost took his breath away. It seemed blasphemous. 'Anyway, what can I do?'
babbled the voluble self. 'I've done all I can. I've talked till I'm sick of it. It's no good, I tell you.' He tried
to persuade himself that he. Ransom, could not possibly be Maleldil's representative as the Un-man was
the representative of Hell. The suggestion was, he argued, itself diabolical-a temptation to fatuous pride,
to megalomania. He was horrified when the darkness simply flung back this argument in his face, almost
impatiently. And then-he wondered how it had escaped him till now-he was forced to perceive that his
own coming to Perelandra was at least as much of a marvel as the Enemy's. That miracle on the right
side, which he had demanded, had in fact occurred. He himself was the miracle.
'Oh, but this is nonsense,' said the voluble self. He, Ransom, with his ridiculous piebald body and his ten
times defeated arguments-what sort of a miracle was that? His mind darted hopefully down a side-alley
that seemed to promise escape. Very well then. He had been brought here miraculously. He was in God's
hands. As long as he did his best-and he had done his best-God would see to the final issue. He had not
succeeded. But he had done his best. No tine could do more. ' 'Tis not in mortals to command success.'
He must not be worried about the final result. Maleldil would see to that. And Maleldil would bring him
safe back to Earth after his very real, though unsuccessful, efforts. Probably Maleldil's real intention was
that he should publish to the human race the truths he had learned on the planet Venus. As for the fate of
Venus, that could not really rest upon his shoulders. It was in God's hands. One must be content' to leave
it there. One must have Faith. . . .
It snapped like a violin string. Not one rag of all this evasion was left. Relentlessly, unmistakably, the
Darkness pressed down upon him the knowledge that this picture of the situation was utterly false. His
journey to Perelandra was not a moral exercise, nor a sham fight. If the issue lay in Maleldil's hands,
Ransom and the Lady were those hands. The fate of a world really depended on how they behaved in the
next few hours. The thing was irrefutably, nakedly real. They could, if they chose, decline to save the
innocence of this new race, and if they declined its innocence would not be saved. It rested with no other
creature in all time or all space. This he saw clearly, though as yet he had no inkling of what he could do.
The voluble self protested, wildly, swiftly, like the propeller of a ship racing when it is out of the water.
The imprudence, the unfairness, the absurdity of it! Did Maleldil want to lose worlds? What was the
sense of so arranging things that anything really important should finally and absolutely depend on such
a man of straw as himself? And at that moment, far away on Earth, as he now could not help
remembering, men were at war, and white-faced subalterns and freckled corporals who had but lately
begun to shave, stood in horrible gaps or crawled forward in deadly darkness, awaking, like him, to the
preposterous truth that all really depended on their actions; and far away in time Horatius stood on the
bridge, and Constantine. settled in his mind whether he would or would not embrace the new religion,
and Eve herself stood looking upon the forbidden fruit and the Heaven of Heavens waited for her
decision. He writhed and ground his teeth, but could not help seeing. Thus, and not otherwise, the world
was made. Either something or nothing must depend on individual choices. And if something, who
could set bounds to it? A stone may determine the course of a river. He was that stone at this horrible
moment which had become the centre of the whole universe. The eldila of all worlds, the sinless
organisms of everlasting light, were silent in Deep Heaven to see what Elwin Ransom of Cambridge
would do.
Then came blessed relief. He suddenly realised that he did not know what he could do. He almost
laughed with joy. All this horror had been premature. No definite task was before him. All that was
being demanded of him was a general and preliminary resolution to oppose the Enemy in any mode
which circumstances might show to be desirable: in fact-and he flew back to the comforting words as a
child flies back to its mother's arms-'to do his best'-or rather, to go on doing his best, for he had really
been doing it all along. "What bugbears we make of things unnecessarily!" he murmured, settling
himself in a slightly more comfortable position. A mild flood of what appeared to him to be cheerful and
rational piety rose and engulfed him. Hullo! What was this? He sat straight upright again, his heart
beating wildly against his side. His thoughts had stumbled on an idea from which they started back as a
man starts back when he has touched a hot poker. But this time the idea was really too childish to
entertain. This time it must be a deception, risen from his own mind. It stood to reason that a struggle
with the Devil meant a spiritual struggle ... the notion of a physical combat was only fit for a savage. If
only it were as simple as that. . . but here the voluble self had made a fatal mistake. The habit of
imaginative honesty was too deeply engrained in Ransom to let him toy for more than a second with the
pretence that he feared bodily strife with the Un-man less than he feared anything else. Vivid pictures
crowded upon him . . . the deadly cold of those hands (he had touched the creature accidentally some
hours before)... the long metallic nails . . . ripping off narrow strips of flesh, pulling out tendons. One
would die slowly. Up to the very end that cruel idiocy would smile into one's face. One would give way
long before one died-beg for mercy, promise it help, worship, anything.
It was fortunate that something so horrible should be so obviously out of the question. Almost, but not
quite. Ransom decreed that whatever the Silence and the Darkness seemed to be saying about this, no
such crude, materialistic struggle could possibly be what Maleldil really intended. Any suggestion to the
contrary must be only his own morbid fancy. It would degrade the spiritual warfare to the condition of
mere mythology. But here he got another check. Long since on Mars, and more strongly since he came
to Perelandra, Ransom had been perceiving that the triple distinction of truth from myth and of both
from fact was purely terrestrial-was part and parcel of that unhappy division between soul and body
which resulted from the Fall. Even on Earth the sacraments existed as a permanent reminder that the
division was neither wholesome nor final. The Incarnation had been the beginning of its disappearance.
In Perelandra it would have no meaning at all. Whatever happened here would be of such a nature that
earth-men would call it mythological. All this he had thought before. Now he knew it. The Presence in
the darkness, never before so formidable, was putting these truths into his hands, like terrible jewels.
The voluble self was almost thrown out of its argumentative stride-became for some seconds as the
voice of a mere whimpering child begging to be let off, to be allowed to go home. Then it rallied. It
explained precisely where the absurdity of a physical battle with the Un-man lay. It would be quite
irrelevant to the spiritual issue. If the Lady were to be kept in obedience only by the forcible removal of
the Tempter, what was the use of that? What would it prove? And if the temptation were not a proving
or testing, why was it allowed to happen at all? Did Maleldil suggest that our own world might have
been saved if the elephant had accidentally trodden on the serpent a moment before Eve was about to
yield? Was it as easy and as un-moral as that? The thing was patently absurd!
The terrible silence went on. It became more and more like a face, a face not without sadness, that looks
upon you while you are telling lies, and never interrupts, but gradually you know that it knows, and
falter, and contradict yourself, and lapse into silence. The voluble self petered out in the end. Almost the
Darkness said to Ransom, 'You know you are only wasting time.' Every minute it became dearer to him
that the parallel he had tried to draw between Eden and Perelandra was crude and imperfect. What had
happened on Earth, when Maleldil was born a man at Bethlehem, had altered the universe for ever. The
new world of Perelandra was not a mere repetition of the old world Tellus. Maleldil never repeated
Himself. As the Lady had said, the same wave never came twice. When Eve fell. God was not Man. He
had not yet made men members of His body: since then He had, and through them henceforward He
would save and suffer. One of the purposes for which He had done all this was to save Perelandra not
through Himself but through Himself in Ransom. If Ransom refused, the plan, so far, miscarried. For
that point in the story, a story far more complicated than he had conceived, it was he who had been
selected. With a strange sense of 'fallings from him, vanishings', he perceived that you might just as well
call Perelandra, not Tellus, the centre. You might look upon the Perelandrian story as merely an indirect
consequence of the Incarnation on earth: or you might look on the Earth story as mere preparation for
the new worlds of which Perelandra was the first. The one was neither more nor less true than the other.
Nothing was more or less important than anything else, nothing was a copy or model of anything else.
At the same time he also perceived that his voluble self had begged the question. Up to this point the
Lady had repelled her assailant. She was shaken and weary, and there were some stains perhaps in her
imagination, but she had stood. In that respect the story already differed from anything that he certainly
knew about the mother of our own race. He did not know whether Eve had resisted at all, or if so, for
how long. Still less did he know how the story would have ended if she had. If the 'serpent' had been
foiled, and returned the next day, and the next. . . what then? Would the trial have lasted for ever? How
would Maleldil have stopped it? Here on Perelandra his own intuition had been not that no temptation
must occur but that 'This can't go on.' This stopping of a third-degree solicitation, already more than
once refused, was a problem to which the terrestrial Fall offered no clue-a new task, and for that new
task a new character in the drama, who appeared (most unfortunately) to be himself. In vain did his mind
hark back, time after time, to the Book of Genesis, asking 'What would have happened?' But to this the
Darkness gave him no answer. Patiently and inexorably it brought him back to the here and the now, and
to the growing certainty of what was here and now demanded. Almost he felt that the words 'would have
happened' were meaningless-mere invitations to wander in what the Lady would have called an
'alongside world' which had no reality. Only the actual was real: and every actual situation was new.
Here in Perelandra the temptation would be stopped by Ransom, or it would not be stopped at all. The
Voice-for it was almost with a Voice that he was now contending-seemed to create around this
alternative an infinite vacancy. This chapter, this page, this very sentence, in the cosmic story was
utterly and eternally itself;
no other passage that had occurred or ever would occur could be substituted for it.
He fell back on a different line of defence. How could he fight the immortal enemy? Even if he were a
fighting man- instead of a sedentary scholar with weak eyes and a baddish wound from the last war-what
use was there in fighting it? It couldn't be killed, could it? But the answer was almost immediately plain.
Weston's body could be destroyed; and presumably that body was the Enemy's only foothold in
Perelandra. By that body, when that body still obeyed a human will, it had entered the new world:
expelled from it, it would doubtless have no other habitation. It had entered that body at Weston's own
invitation, and without such invitation could enter no other. Ransom remembered that the unclean
spirits, in the Bible, had a horror of being cast out into the 'deep'. And thinking of these things he
perceived at last, with a sinking of heart, that if physical action were indeed demanded of him, it was an
action, by ordinary standards, neither impossible nor hopeless. On the physical plane it was one middleaged,
sedentary body against another, and both unarmed save for fists and teeth and nails. At the thought
of these details, terror and disgust overcame him. To kill the thing with such weapons (he remembered
his killing of the frog) would be a nightmare, to be killed-who knew how slowly?-was more than he
could face. That he would be killed he felt certain. 'When,' he asked, 'did I even win a fight in all my
life?'
He was no longer making efforts to resist the conviction of what he must do. He had exhausted all his
efforts. The answer was plain beyond all subterfuge. The Voice out of the night spoke it to him in such
unanswerable fashion that, though there was no noise, he almost felt it must wake the woman who slept
close by. He was faced with the impossible. This he must do:
this he could not do. In vain he reminded himself of the things that unbelieving boys might at this
moment be doing on Earth for a lesser cause. His will was in that valley where the appeal to shame
becomes useless-nay, makes the valley darker and deeper. He believed he could face the Un-man with
firearms:
even that he could stand up unarmed and face certain death if the creature had retained Weston's
revolver. But to come to grips with it, to go voluntarily into those dead yet living arms, to grapple with
it, naked chest to naked chest. . . . Terrible follies came into his mind. He would fail to obey the Voice,
but it would be all right because he would repent later on, when he was back on Earth. He would lose his
nerve as St Peter had done, and be, like St Peter, forgiven. Intellectually, of course, he knew the answer
to these temptations perfectly well; but he was at one of those moments when all the utterances of
intellect sound like twice-told tales. Then some cross-wind of the mind changed his mood. Perhaps he
would fight and win, perhaps not even be badly mauled. But no faintest hint of a guarantee in that
direction came to him from the darkness. The future was black as the night itself.
"It is not for nothing that you are named Ransom," said the Voice. And he knew that this was no fancy
of his own. He knew it for a very curious reason-because he had known for many years that his surname
was derived not from ransom but from Ranolf's son. It would never have occurred to him thus to
associate the two words. To connect the name Ransom with the act of ransoming would have been for
him a mere pun. But even his voluble self did not now dare to suggest that the Voice was making a play
upon words. All in a moment of time he perceived that what was, to human philologists, a mere
accidental resemblance of two sounds, was in truth no accident. The whole distinction between things
accidental and things designed, like the distinction between fact and myth, was purely terrestrial. The
pattern is so large that within the little frame of earthly experience there appear pieces of it between
which we can see no connection, and other pieces between which we can. Hence we rightly, for our use,
distinguish the accidental from the essential. But step outside that frame and the distinction drops down
into the void, fluttering useless wings. He had been forced out of the frame, caught up into the larger
pattern. He knew now why the old philosophers had said that there is no such thing as chance or fortune
beyond the Moon. Before his Mother had borne him, before his ancestors had been called Ransoms,
before ransom had been the name for a payment that delivers, before the world was made, all these
things had so stood together in eternity that the very significance of the pattern at this point lay in their
coming together in just this fashion. And he bowed his head and groaned and repined against his fate-to
be still a man and yet to be forced up into the metaphysical world, to enact what philosophy only thinks.
"My name also is Ransom," said the Voice.
It was some time before the purport of this saying dawned upon him. He whom the other worlds call
Maleldil, was the world's ransom, his own ransom, well he knew. But to what purpose was it said now?
Before the answer came to him he felt its insufferable approach and held out his arms before him as if he
could keep it from forcing open the door of his mind. But it came. So that was the real issue. If he now
failed, this world also would hereafter be redeemed. If he were not the ransom. Another would be. Yet
nothing was ever repeated. Not a second crucifixion: perhaps-who knows-not even a second
Incarnation . .. some act of even more appalling love, some glory of yet deeper humility. For he had seen
already how the pattern grows and how from each world it sprouts into the next through some other
dimension. The small external evil which Satan had done in Malacandra was only as a line:
the deeper evil he had done in Earth was as a square: if Venus fell, her evil would be a cube-her
Redemption beyond conceiving. Yet redeemed she would be. He had long known that great issues hung
on his choice; but as he now realised the true width of the frightful freedom that was being put into his
hands-a width to which all merely spatial infinity seemed narrow-he felt like a man brought out under
naked heaven, on the edge of a precipice, into the teeth of a wind that came howling from the Pole. He
had pictured himself, till now, standing before the Lord, like Peter. But it was worse. He sat before Him
like Pilate. It lay with him to save or to spill. His hands had been reddened, as all men's hands have
been, in the slaying before the foundation of the world; now, if he chose, he would dip them again in the
same blood. "Mercy," he groaned; and then, "Lord, why not me?" But there was no answer.
The thing still seemed impossible. But gradually something happened to him which had happened to
him only twice before in his life. It had happened once while he was trying to make up his mind to do a
very dangerous job in the last war. It had happened again while he was screwing his resolution to go and
see a certain man in London and make to him an excessively embarrassing confession which justice
demanded. In both cases the thing had seemed a sheer impossibility: he had not thought but known that,
being what he was, he was psychologically incapable of doing it; and then, without any apparent
movement of the will, as objective and unemotional. as the reading on a dial, there had arisen before
him, with perfect certitude, the knowledge 'about this time tomorrow you will have done the impossible'.
The same thing happened now. His fear, his shame, his love, all his arguments, were not altered in the
least. The thing was neither more nor less dreadful than it had been before. The only difference was that
he knew-almost as a historical proposition-that it was going to be done. He might beg, weep, or rebelmight
curse or adore-sing like a martyr or blaspheme like a devil. It made not the slightest difference.
The thing was going to be done. There was going to arrive, in the course of time, a moment at which he
would have done it. The future act stood there, fixed and unalterable as if he had already performed it. It
was a mere irrelevant detail that it happened to occupy the position we call future instead of that which
we call past. The whole struggle was over, and yet there seemed to have been no moment of victory.
You might say, if you liked, that the power of choice had been simply set aside and an inflexible destiny
substituted for it. On the other hand, you might say that he had been delivered from the rhetoric of his
passions and had emerged into unassailable freedom. Ransom could not, for the life of him, see any
difference between these two statements. Predestination and freedom were apparently identical. He
could no longer see any meaning in the many arguments he had heard on this subject.
No sooner had he discovered that he would certainly try to kill the Un-man tomorrow than the doing of
it appeared to him a smaller matter than he had supposed. He could hardly remember why he had
accused himself of megalomania when the idea first occurred to him. It was true that if he left it undone,
Maleldil Himself would do some greater thing instead. In that sense, he stood for Maleldil: but no more
than Eve would have stood for Him by simply not eating the apple, or than any man stands for Him in
doing any good action. As there was no comparison in person, so there was none in suffering-or only
such comparison as may be between a man who burns his finger putting out a spark and a fireman who
loses his life in fighting a conflagration because that spark was not put out. He asked no longer 'Why
me?' It might as well be he as another. It might as well be any other choice as this. The fierce light which
he had seen resting on this moment of decision rested in reality on all.
"I have cast your Enemy into sleep," said the Voice. "He will not wake till morning. Get up. Walk
twenty paces back into the wood; there sleep. Your sister sleeps also."
WHEN some dreaded morning comes we usually wake fully to it at once. Ransom passed with no
intermediate stages from dreamless sleep to a full consciousness of his task. He found himself alone-the
island gently rocking on a sea that was neither calm nor stormy. The golden light, glinting through
indigo trunks of trees, told him in which direction the water lay. He went to it and bathed. Then, having
landed again, he lay down and drank. He stood for a few minutes running his hands through his wet hair
and stroking his limbs. Looking down at his own body he noticed how greatly the sunburn on one side
and the pallor on the other had decreased. He would hardly be christened Piebald if the Lady were now
to meet him for the first time. His colour had become more like ivory: and his toes, after so many days
of nakedness, had begun to lose the cramped, squalid shape imposed by boots. Altogether he thought
better of himself as a human animal than he had done before. He felt pretty certain that he would never
again wield an un-maimed body until a greater morning came for the whole universe, and he was glad
that the instrument had been thus tuned up to concert pitch before he had to surrender it. "When I wake
up after Thy image, I shall be satisfied," he said to himself.
Presently he walked into the woods. Accidentally-for he was at the moment intent on food-he blundered
through a whole cloud of the arboreal bubbles. The pleasure was as sharp as when he had first
experienced it, and his very stride was different as he emerged from them. Although this was to be his
last meal, he did not even now feel it proper to look for any favourite fruit. But what met him was
gourds. 'A good breakfast on the morning you're hanged,' he thought whimsically as he let the empty
shell drop from his hand-filled for the moment with such pleasure as seemed to make the whole world a
dance. 'All said and done,' he thought, 'it's been worth it. I have had a time. I have lived in Paradise.'
He went a little farther in the wood, which grew thickly hereabout, and almost tripped over the sleeping
form of the Lady. It was unusual for her to be sleeping at this time of the day, and he assumed it was
Maleldil's doing. 'I shall never see her again,' he thought; and then, 'I shall never again look on a female
body in quite the same way as I look on this.' As he stood looking down on her, what was most with him
was an intense and orphaned longing that he might, if only for once, have seen the great Mother of his
own race thus, in her innocence and splendour. "Other things, other blessings, other glories," he
murmured. "But never that. Never in all worlds, that. God can make good use of all that happens. But
the loss is real." He looked at her once again and then walked abruptly past the place where she lay. 'I
was right,' he thought, 'it couldn't have gone on. It was time to stop it.'
It took him a long time, wandering like this, in and out of the dark yet coloured thickets, before he found
his Enemy. He came on his old friend the dragon, just as he had first seen it, coiled about the trunk of a
tree, but it also was asleep;
and now he noticed that ever since he awoke he had perceived no chattering of birds, no rustling of sleek
bodies or peering of brown eyes through the leafage, nor heard any noise but that of water. It seemed
that the Lord God had cast that whole island or perhaps that whole world into deep sleep. For a moment
this gave him a sense of desolation, but almost at once he rejoiced that no memory of blood and rage
should be left imprinted in these happy minds.
After about an hour, suddenly rounding a little clump of bubble trees he found himself face to face with
the Un-man. 'Is it wounded already?' he thought as the first vision of a blood-stained chest broke on him.
Then he saw that of course it was not its own blood. A bird, already half plucked and with beak wide
open in the soundless yell of strangulation, was feebly struggling in its long clever hands. Ransom found
himself acting before he knew what he had done. Some memory of boxing at his preparatory school
must have awaked, for he found he had delivered a straight left with all his might on the Un-man's jaw.
But he had forgotten that he was not fighting with gloves; what recalled him to himself was the pain as
his fist crashed against the jaw-bone-it seemed almost to have broken his knuckles-and the sickening jar
all up his arm. He stood still for a second under the shock of it and this gave the Un-man time to fall
back about six paces. It too had not liked the first taste of the encounter. It had apparently bitten its
tongue, for blood came bubbling out of the mouth when it
tried to speak. It was still holding the bird.
"So you mean to try strength," it said in English, speaking thick. "Put down that bird," said Ransom.
• "But this is very foolish," said the Un-man. "Do you not know who I am?"
• "I know what you are," said Ransom. "Which of them doesn't matter."
"And you think, little one," it answered, "that you can fight with me? You think He will help you,
perhaps? Many thought that. I've known Him longer than you, little one. They all think He's going to
help them-till they come to their senses screaming recantations too late in the middle of the fire,
mouldering in concentration camps, writhing under saws, jibbering in mad-houses, or nailed on to
crosses. Could He help Himself?"-and the creature suddenly threw back its head and cried in a voice so
loud that it seemed the golden sky-roof must break, "Eloi, Eloi, lama sdbachthani."
And the moment it had done so. Ransom felt certain that the sounds it had made were perfect Aramaic
of the First Century. The Un-man was not quoting; it was remembering. These were the very words
spoken from the Cross, treasured through all those years in the burning memory of the outcast creature
which had heard them, and now brought forward in hideous parody, the horror made him momentarily
sick. Before he had recovered the Un-man was upon him, howling like a gale, with eyes so wide opened
that they seemed to have no lids, and with all its hair rising on its scalp. It had him caught tightly to its
chest, with its arms about him, and its nails were ripping great strips off his back. His own arms were
inside its embrace and, pummelling wildly, he could get no blow at it. He turned his head and bit deeply
into the muscle of its right arm, at first without success, then deeper. It gave a howl, tried to hold on, and
then suddenly he was free. Its defence was for an instant unready and he found himself raining punches
about the region of its heart, faster and harder than he had supposed possible. He could hear through its
open mouth the great gusts of breath that he was knocking out of it. Then its hands came up again,
fingers arched like claws. It was not trying to box. It wanted to grapple. He knocked its right arm aside
with a horrible shock of bone against bone and caught it a jab on the fleshy part of the chin: at the same
moment its nails tore his right. He grabbed at its arms. More by luck than by skill he got it held by both
wrists.
What followed for the next minute or so would hardly have looked like a fight at all to any spectator.
The Un-man was trying with every ounce of power it could find in Weston's body to wrench its arms
free from Ransom's hands, and he, with every ounce of his power, was trying to retain his manacle hold
round its wrists. But this effort, which sent streams of sweat down the backs of both combatants,
resulted in a slow and seemingly leisurely, and even aimless, movement of both pairs of arms. Neither
could for the moment hurt the other. The Un-man bent forward its head and tried to bite, but Ransom
straightened his arms and kept it at arm's length. There seemed no reason why this should ever end.
Then suddenly it shot out its leg and crooked it behind his knee. He was nearly taken off his feet.
Movements became quick and flurried on both sides. Ransom in his turn tried to trip, and failed. He
started bending the enemy's left arm back by main force with some idea of breaking or at least spraining
it. But in the effort to do so he must have weakened his hold on the other wrist. It got its right free. He
had just time to close his eyes before the nails tore fiercely down his cheek and the pain put an end to the
blows his left was already raining on its ribs. A second later-he did not know quite how it happenedthey
were standing apart, their chests heaving in great gasps, each staring at the other.
Both were doubtless sorry spectacles. Ransom could not see his own wounds but he seemed to be
covered with blood. The enemy's eyes were nearly closed and the body, wherever the remains of
Weston's shirt did not conceal it, was a mass of what would soon be bruises. This, and its laboured
breathing, and the very taste of its strength in their grapples, had altered Ransom's state of mind
completely. He had been astonished to find it no stronger. He had all along, despite what reason told
him, expected that the strength of its body would be superhuman, diabolical. He had reckoned on arms
that could no more be caught and stopped than the blades of an aeroplane's propeller. But now he knew,
by actual experience, that its bodily strength was merely that of Weston. On the physical plane it was
one middle-aged scholar against another. Weston had been the more powerfully built of the two men,
but he was fat; his body would not take punishment well. Ransom was nimbler and better breathed. His
former certainty of death now seemed to him ridiculous. It was a very fair match. There was no reason
why he should not win-and live.
This time it was Ransom who attacked and the second bout was much the same as the first. What it came
to was that whenever he could box Ransom was superior; whenever he came under tooth and claw he
was beaten. His mind, even in the thick of it, was now quite clear. He saw that the issue of the day hung
on a very simple question-whether loss of blood would undo him before heavy blows on heart and
kidneys undid the other.
All that rich world was asleep about them. There were no rules, no umpire, no spectators; but mere
exhaustion, constantly compelling them to fall apart, divided the grotesque duel into rounds as
accurately as could be wished. Ransom could never remember how many of these rounds were fought.
The thing became like the frantic repetitions of delirium, and thirst a greater pain than any the adversary
could inflict. Sometimes they were both on the ground together. Once he was actually astride the
enemy's chest, squeezing its throat with both hands and-he found to his surprise-shouting a line out of
The Battle of Maldon: but it tore his arms so with its nails and so pounded his back with its knees that he
was thrown off.
Then he remembers-as one remembers an island of consciousness preceded and followed by long
anaesthesia-going forward to meet the Un-man for what seemed the thousandth time and knowing
clearly that he could not fight much more. He remembers seeing the Enemy for a moment looking not
like Weston but like a mandrill, and realising almost at once that this was delirium. He wavered. Then an
experience that perhaps no good man can ever have in our world came over him- a torrent of perfectly
unmixed and lawful hatred. The energy of hating, never before felt without some guilt, without some
dim knowledge that he was failing fully to distinguish the sinner from the sin, rose into his arms and legs
till he felt that they were pillars of burning blood. What was before him appeared no longer a creature of
corrupted will. It was corruption itself to which will was attached only as an instrument. Ages ago it had
been a Person: but the ruins of personality now survived in it only as weapons at the disposal of a
furious self-exiled negation. It is perhaps difficult to understand why this filled Ransom not with horror
but with a kind of joy. The joy came from finding at last what hatred was made for. As a boy with an axe
rejoices on finding a tree, or a boy with a box of coloured chalks rejoices on finding a pile of perfectly
white paper, so he rejoiced in the perfect congruity between his emotion and its object. Bleeding and
trembling with weariness as he was, he felt that nothing was beyond his power, and when he flung
himself upon the living Death, the eternal Surd in the universal mathematic, he was astonished, and yet
(on a deeper level) not astonished at all, at his own strength. His arms seemed to move quicker than his
thought. His hands taught him terrible things. He felt its rib break, he heard its jaw-bone crack. The
whole creature seemed to be crackling and splitting under his blows. His own pains, where it tore him,
somehow failed to matter. He felt that he could so fight, so hate with a perfect hatred, for a whole year.
All at once he found he was beating the air. He was in such a state that at first he could not understand
what was happening -could not believe that the Un-man had fled. His momentary stupidity gave it a
start; and when he came to his senses he was just in time to see it vanishing into the wood, with a
limping uneven stride, with one arm hanging useless, and with its dog-like howl. He dashed after it. For
a second or so it was concealed from him by the tree trunks. Then it was once more in sight. He began
running with all his power, but it kept its lead.
It was a fantastic chase, in and out of the lights and shadows and up and down the slowly moving ridges
and valleys. They passed the dragon where it slept. They passed the Lady, sleeping with a smile on her
face. The Un-man stooped low as it passed her with the fingers of its left hand crooked for scratching. It
would have torn her if it dared, but Ransom was close behind and it could not risk the delay. They
passed through a flock of large orange-coloured birds all fast asleep, each on one leg, each with its head
beneath its wing, so that they looked like a grove of formal and flowery shrubs. They picked their steps
where pairs and families of the yellow wallabies lay on their backs with eyes fast shut and their small
forepaws folded on their breasts as if they were crusaders carved on tombs. They stooped beneath
branches which were bowed down because on them lay the tree-pigs, making a comfortable noise like a
child's snore. They crashed through thickets of bubble trees and forgot, for the moment, their weariness.
It was a large island. They came out of the woods and rushed across wide fields of saffron or of silver,
sometimes deep to their ankles and sometimes to their waists in the cool or poignant scents. They rushed
down into yet other woods which lay, as they approached them, at the bottom of secret valleys, but rose
before they reached them to crown the summits of lonely hills. Ransom could not gain on his quarry. It
was a wonder that any creature so maimed as its uneven strides showed it to be, could maintain that
pace. If the ankle were really sprained, as he suspected, it must suffer indescribably at every step. Then
the horrible thought came into his mind that perhaps it could somehow hand over the pain to be borne by
whatever remnants of Weston's consciousness yet survived in its body. The idea that something which
had once been of his own kind and fed at a human breast might even now be imprisoned in the thing he
was pursuing redoubled his hatred, which was unlike nearly all other hatreds he had ever known, for it
increased his strength.
As they emerged from about the fourth wood he saw the sea before them not thirty yards away. The Unman
rushed on as if it made no distinction between land and water and plunged in with a great splash.
He could see its head, dark against the coppery sea, as it swam. Ransom rejoiced, for swimming was the
only sport in which he had ever approached excellence. As he took the water he lost sight of the Un-man
for a moment, then, looking up and shaking the wet hair from his face as he struck out in pursuit (his
hair was very long by now), he saw its whole body upright and above the surface as though it were
sitting on the sea. A second glance and he realised that it had mounted a fish. Apparently the charmed
slumber extended only to the island, for the Un-man on his mount was making good speed. It was
stooping down doing something to its fish, Ransom could not see what. Doubtless it would have many
ways of urging the animal to quicken its pace.
For a moment he was in despair: but he had forgotten the man-loving nature of these sea-horses. He
found almost at once that he was in a complete shoal of the creatures, leaping and frisking to attract his
attention. In spite of their good will it was no easy matter to get himself on to the slippery surface of the
fine specimen which his grabbing hands first reached:
while he was struggling to mount, the distance widened between him and the fugitive. But at last it was
done. Settling himself behind the great goggle-eyed head he nudged the animal with his knees, kicked it
with his heels, whispered words of praise and encouragement, and in general did all he could to awake
its metal. It began threshing its way forward. But looking ahead Ransom could no longer see any sign of
the Un-man, but only the long empty ridge of the next wave coming towards him. Doubtless the quarry
was beyond the ridge. Then he noticed that he had no cause to be bothered about the direction. The slope
of water was dotted all over with the great fish, each marked by a heap of yellow foam and some of
them spouting as well. The Un-man possibly had not reckoned on the instinct which made them follow
as leader any of their company on whom a human being sat. They were all forging straight ahead, no
more uncertain of their course than homing ; rooks or bloodhounds on a scent. As Ransom and his fish
rose to the top of the wave, he found himself looking down on a wide shallow trough shaped much like a
valley in the home counties. Far away and now approaching the opposite slope was the little, dark
puppet-like silhouette of the Un-man: and between it and him the whole school of fish was spread out in
three or "four lines. Clearly there was no danger of losing touch. Ransom was hunting him with the fish
and they would not cease to follow. He laughed aloud. "My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind, so
flew'd so sanded," he roared.
Now for the first time the blessed fact that he was no longer fighting nor even standing thrust itself upon
his attention. He made to assume a more relaxed position and was pulled up sharp by a grinding pain
across his back. He foolishly put back his hand to explore his shoulders, and almost screamed at the
'pain of his own touch. His back seemed to be in shreds and the shreds seemed to be all stuck together.
At the same time he noticed that he had lost a tooth and that nearly all the skin was gone from his
knuckles; and underneath the smarting surface pains, deeper and more ominous aches racked him from
head to foot. He had not known he was so knocked up.
Then he remembered that he was thirsty. Now that he had begun to cool and stiffen he found the task of
getting a drink from the water that raced by him extremely difficult. His first idea had been to stoop low
till his head was almost upside down and bury his face in the water: but a single attempt cured him of
that. He was reduced to putting down his cupped hands, and even this, as his stiffness grew upon him,
had to be done with infinite caution and with many groans and gasps. It took many minutes to get a tiny
sip which merely mocked his thirst. The quenching of that thirst kept him employed for what seemed to
be half an hour-a half hour of sharp pains and insane pleasures. Nothing had ever tasted so good. Even
when he had done drinking he went on taking up water and splashing it over himself. This would have
been among the happiest moments of his life-if only the smarting of his back did not seem to be getting
worse and if only he were not afraid that there was poison in the cuts. His legs kept on getting stuck to
the fish and having to be unstuck with pain and care. Every now and then blackness threatened to come
over him. He could easily have fainted, but he thought 'This will never do' and fixed his eyes on objects
close at hand and thought plain thoughts and so retained his consciousness.
All this time the Un-man rode on before him, up-wave and down-wave, and the fishes followed and
Ransom followed the fishes. There seemed to be more of them now, as if the chase had met other shoals
and gathered them up into itself in snowball fashion: and soon there were creatures other than fish. Birds
with long necks like swans-he could not tell their colour for they looked black against the sky-came,
the loneliest, and the one that had least to do with Man. No land was in sight, nor had been for many
hours. He was on the high seas, the waste places of Perelandra, as he had not been since his first arrival.
The sea noises continuously filled his ear: the sea smell, unmistakable and stirring as that of our
Tellurian oceans, but quite different in its warmth and golden sweetness, entered into his brain. It also
was wild and strange. It was not hostile: if it had been, its wildness and strangeness would have been the
less, for hostility is a relation and an enemy is not a total stranger. It came into his head that he knew
nothing at all about this world. Some day, no doubt, it would be peopled by the descendants of the King
and Queen. But all its millions of years in the unpeopled past, all its uncounted miles of laughing water
in the lonely present. . . did they exist solely for that? It was strange that he to whom a wood or a
morning sky on earth had sometimes been a kind of meal, should have had to come to another planet in
order to realise Nature as a thing in her own right. The diffused meaning, the inscrutable character,
which had been both in Tellus and Perelandra since they split off from the Sun, and which would be, in
one sense, displaced by the advent of imperial man, yet, in some other sense, not displaced at all,
enfolded him on every side and caught him into itself.
DARKNESS fell upon the waves as suddenly as if it had been poured out of a bottle. As soon as the
colours and the distances were thus taken away, sound and pain became more emphatic. The world was
reduced to a dull ache, and sudden stabs, and the beating of the fish's fins, and the monotonous yet
infinitely varied noises of the water. Then he found himself almost falling off the fish, recovered his seat
with difficulty, and realised that he had been asleep, perhaps for hours. He foresaw that this danger
would continually recur. After some consideration he levered himself painfully out of the narrow saddle
behind its head and stretched his body at full length along the fish's back. He parted his legs and wound
them about the creature as far as he could and did the same with his arms, hoping that thus he could
retain his mount even while sleeping. It was the best he could do. A strange thrilling sensation crept over
him, communicated doubtless from the movement of its muscles. It gave him the illusion of sharing in
its strong bestial life, as if he were himself becoming a fish.
Long after this he found himself staring into something like a human face. It ought to have terrified him
but, as sometimes happens to us in a dream, it did not. It was a bluish-greenish face shining apparently
by its own light. The eyes were much larger than those of a man and gave it a goblin appearance. A
fringe of corrugated membranes at the sides suggested whiskers. With a shock he realised that he was
not dreaming, but awake. The thing was real. He was still lying, sore and wearied, on the body of the
fish and this face belonged to something that was swimming alongside him. He remembered the
swimming sub-men or mermen whom he had seen before. He was not at all frightened, and he guessed
that the creature's reaction to him was the very same as his to it-an uneasy, though not hostile,
bewilderment. Each was wholly irrelevant to the other. They met as the branches of different trees meet
when the wind brings them together.
Ransom now raised himself once more to a sitting position. He found that the darkness was not
complete. His own fish swam in a bath of phosphorescence and so did the stranger at his side. All about
him were other blobs and daggers of blue light and he could dimly make out from the shapes which were
fish and which were the water-people. Their movements faintly indicated the contours of the waves and
introduced some hint of perspective into the night. He noticed presently that several of the water-people
in his immediate neighbourhood seemed to be feeding. They were picking dark masses of something off
the water with their webbed frog-like hands and devouring it. As they munched, it hung out of their
mouths in bushy and shredded bundles and looked like moustaches. It is significant that it never
occurred to him to try to establish any contact with these beings, as he had done with every other animal
on Perelandra, nor did they try to establish any with him. They did not seem to be the natural subjects of
man as the other creatures were. He got the impression that they simply shared a planet with him as
sheep and horses share a field, each species ignoring the other. Later, this came to be a trouble in his
mind: but for the moment he was occupied with a more practical problem. The sight of their eating had
reminded him that he was hungry and he was wondering whether the stuff they ate were eatable by him.
It took him a long time, scooping the water with his fingers, to catch any of it. When at last he did it
turned out to be of the same general structure as one of our smaller seaweeds, and to have little bladders
that popped when one pressed them. It was tough and slippery, but not salt like the weeds of a Tellurian
sea. What it tasted like, he could never properly describe. It is to be noted all through this story that
while Ransom was on Perelandra his sense of taste had become something more than it was on Earth: it
gave knowledge as well as pleasure, though not a knowledge that can be reduced to words. As soon as
he had eaten a few mouthfuls of the seaweed he felt his mind oddly changed. He felt the surface of the
sea to be the top of the world. He thought of the floating islands as we think of clouds;
he saw them in imagination as they would appear from below- mats of fibre with long streamers handing
down from them, and became startlingly conscious of his own experience in walking on the topside of
them as a miracle or a myth. He felt his memory of the Green Lady and all her promised descendants
and all the issues which had occupied him ever since he came to Perelandra rapidly fading from his
mind, as a dream fades when we wake, or as if it were shouldered aside by a whole world of interests
and emotions to which he could give no name. It terrified him. In spite of his hunger he threw the rest of
the weed away.
He must have slept again, for the next scene that he remembers was in daylight. The Un-man was still
visible ahead, and the shoal of fishes was still spread out between it and him. The birds had abandoned
the chase. And now at last a full and prosaic sense of his position descended upon him. It is a curious
flaw in the reason, to judge from Ransom's experience, that when a man comes to a strange planet he at
first quite forgets its size. That whole world is so small in comparison with his journey through space
that he forgets the distances within it: any two places in Mars, or in Venus, appear to him like places in
the same town. But now, as Ransom looked round once more and saw nothing in every direction but
golden sky and tumbling waves, the full absurdity of this delusion was borne in upon him. Even if there
were continents in Perelandra, he might well be divided from the nearest of them by the breadth of the
Pacific or more. But he had no reason to suppose that there were any. He had no reason to suppose that
even the floating islands were very numerous, or that they were equally distributed over the surface of
the planet. Even if their loose archipelago spread over a thousand square miles, what would that be but a
negligible freckling in a landless ocean that rolled for ever round a globe not much smaller than the
World of Men? Soon his fish would be tired. Already, he fancied, it was not swimming at its original
speed. The Unman would doubtless torture its mount to swim till it died. But he could not do that. As he
was thinking of these things and staring ahead, he saw something that turned his heart cold. One of the
other fish deliberately turned out of line, spurted a little column of foam, dived, and reappeared some
yards away, apparently drifting. In a few minutes it was out of sight. It had had enough.
And now the experiences of the past day and night began to make a direct assault upon his faith. The
solitude of the seas and, still more, the experiences which had followed his taste of the seaweed, had
insinuated a doubt as to whether this world in any real sense belonged to those who called themselves its
King and Queen. How could it be made for them when most of it, in fact, was uninhabitable by them?
Was not the very idea naive and anthropomorphic in the highest degree? As for the great prohibition, on
which so much had seemed to hang-was it really so important? What did these roarers with the yellow
foam, and these strange people who lived in them, care whether two little creatures, now far away, lived
or did not live on one particular rock? The parallelism between the scenes he had lately witnessed and
those recorded in the Book of Genesis, and which had hitherto given him the feeling of knowing by
experience what other men only believe, now began to shrink in importance. Need it prove anything
more than that similar irrational taboos had accompanied the dawn of reason in two different worlds? It
was all very well to talk of Maleldil: but where was Maleldil now? If this illimitable ocean said
anything, it said something very different. Like all solitudes it was, indeed, haunted: but not by an
anthropomorphic Deity, rather by the wholly inscrutable to which man and his life remained eternally
irrelevant. And beyond this ocean was space itself. In vain did Ransom try to remember that he had been
in 'space' and found it Heaven, tingling with a fullness of life for which infinity itself was not one cubic
inch too large. All that seemed like a dream. That opposite mode of thought which he had often mocked
and called in mockery The Empirical Bogey, came surging into his mind-the great myth of our century
with its gases and galaxies, its light years and evolutions, its nightmare perspectives of simple arithmetic
in which everything that can possibly hold significance for the mind becomes the mere by-product of
essential disorder. Always till now he had belittled it, had treated with a certain disdain its flat
superlatives, its clownish amazement that different things should be of different sizes, its glib
munificence of ciphers. Even now, his reason was not quite subdued, though his heart would not listen
to his reason. Part of him still knew that the size of a thing is the least important characteristic, that the
material universe derived from the comparing and mythopoeic power within him that very majesty
before which he was now asked to abase himself, and that mere numbers could not overawe us unless
we lent them, from our own resources, that awfulness which they themselves could no more supply than
a banker's ledger. But this knowledge remained an abstraction. Mere bigness and loneliness overbore
him.
These thoughts must have taken several hours and absorbed all his attention. He was aroused by what he
least expected- the sound of a human voice. Emerging from his reverie he saw that all the fishes had
deserted him. His own was swimming feebly: and there a few yards away, no longer fleeing him but
moving slowly towards him, was the Un-man. It sat hugging itself, its eyes almost shut up with bruises,
its flesh the colour of liver, its leg apparently broken, its mouth twisted with pain.
"Ransom," it said feebly.
Ransom held his tongue. He was not going to encourage it to start that game again.
"Ransom," it said again in a broken voice, "for God's sake speak to me."
He glanced at it in surprise. Tears were on its cheeks. "Ransom, don't cold-shoulder me," it said. "Tell
me what has happened. What have they done to us? You-you're all bleeding. My leg's broken ..." its
voice died away in a whimper.
"Who are you?" he asked sharply.
"Oh, don't pretend you don't know me," mumbled Weston's voice. "I'm Weston. You're Ransom-Elwin
Ransom of Leicester, Cambridge, the philologist. We've had our quarrels, I know. I'm sorry. I dare say
I've been in the wrong. Ransom, you'll not leave me to die in this horrible place, will you?"
"Where did you learn Aramaic?" asked Ransom, keeping his eyes on the other.
"Aramaic?" said Weston's voice. "I don't know what you're talking about. It's not much of a game to
make fun of a dying man."
"But are you really Weston?" said Ransom, for he began to think that Weston had actually come back.
"Who else should I be?" came the answer, with a burst of weak temper, on the verge of tears. "Where
have you been?" asked Ransom. Weston-if it was Weston-shuddered. "Where are we now?" he asked
presently.
"In Perelandra-Venus, you know," answered Ransom. "Have you found the space-ship?" asked Weston.
"I never saw it except at a distance," said Ransom. "And I've no idea where it is now-a couple of
hundred miles away for all I know." "You mean we're trapped?" said Weston, almost in a scream.
Ransom said nothing and the other bowed his head and cried like a baby.
"Come," said Ransom at last, "there's no good taking it like that. Hang it all, you'd not be much better off
if you were on Earth. You remember they're having a war there. The Germans may be bombing London
to bits at this moment!" Then seeing the creature still crying, he added, "Buck up, Weston. It's only
death, all said and done. We should have to die some day, you know. We shan't lack water, and hungerwithout
thirst-isn't too bad. As for drowning-well, a bayonet wound, or cancer, would be worse."
"You mean to say you're going to leave me," said Weston. "I can't, even if I wanted to," said Ransom.
"Don't you see I'm in the same position as yourself?"
"You'll promise not to go off and leave me in the lurch?" said Weston.
"All right, I'll promise if you like. Where could I go to?" Weston looked very slowly all round and then
urged his fish little nearer to Ransom's.
"Where is ... it?' he asked in a whisper. "You know," and he made meaningless gestures.
"I might ask you the same question," said Ransom. "Me?" said Weston. His face was, in one way and
another, so disfigured that it was hard to be sure of its expression.
"Have you any idea of what's been happening to you for the last few days?" said Ransom. Weston once
more looked all round him uneasily. "It's all true, you know," he said at last. "What's all true?" said
Ransom.
Suddenly Weston turned on him with a snarl of rage. "It's all very well for you," he said. "Drowning
doesn't hurt and death is bound to come anyway, and all that nonsense. What do you know about death?
It's all true, I tell you." "What are you talking about?"
"I've been stuffing myself up with a lot of nonsense all my life," said Weston. "Trying to persuade
myself that it matters what happens to the human race . . . trying to believe that anything you can do will
make the universe bearable. It's all rot, do you see?"
"And something else is truer!"
"Yes," said Weston, and then was silent for a long time.
"We'd better turn our fishes head on to this," said Ransom presently, his eyes on the sea, "or we'll be
driven apart." Weston obeyed without seeming to notice what he did, and for a time the two men were
riding very slowly side by side. "I'll tell you what's true," said Weston presently. "What?"
"A little child that creeps upstairs when nobody's looking and very slowly turns the handle to take one
peep into the room where its grandmother's dead body is laid out-and then runs away and has bad
dreams. An enormous grandmother, you understand."
"What do you mean by saying that's truer?" "I mean that child knows something about the universe
which all science and all religion is trying to hide." Ransom said nothing.
"Lots of things," said Weston presently. "Children are afraid to go through a churchyard at night, and the
grown-ups tell them not to be silly: but the children know better than the grown-ups. People in Central
Africa doing beastly things with masks on in the middle of the night-and missionaries and civil servants
say it's all superstition. Well, the blacks know more about the universe than the white people. Dirty
priests in back streets in Dublin frightening half-witted children to death with stories about it. You'd say
they are unenlightened. They're not: except that they think there is a way of escape. There isn't. That is
the real universe, always has been, always will be. That's what it all means."
"I'm not quite clear--" began Ransom, when Weston interrupted him.
"That's why it's so important to live as long as you can. All the good things are now-a thin little rind of
what we call life, put on for show, and then-the real universe for ever and ever. To thicken the rind by
one centimetre-to live one week, one day, one half hour longer-that's the only thing that matters. Of
course you don't know it: but every man who is waiting to be hanged knows it. You say 'What difference
does a short reprieve make?' What difference!!" "But nobody need go there," said Ransom. "I know
that's what you believe," said Weston. "But you're wrong. It's only a small parcel of civilised people who
think that. Humanity as a whole knows better. It knows-Homer knew-that all the dead have sunk down
into the inner darkness: under the rind. All witless, all twittering, gibbering, decaying. Bogeymen. Every
savage knows that all ghosts hate the living who are still enjoying the rind: just as old women hate girls
who still have their good looks. It's quite right to be afraid of the ghosts. You're going to be one all the
same." "You don't believe in God," said Ransom. "Well, now, that's another point," said Weston. "I've
been to church as well as you when I was a boy. There's more sense in parts of the Bible than you
religious people know. Doesn't is say He's the God of the living, not of the dead? That's just it. Perhaps
your God does exist-but it makes no difference whether He does or not. No, of course you wouldn't see
it;
but one day you will. I don't think you've got the idea of the rind-the thin outer skin which we call lifereally
clear. Picture the universe as an infinite glove with this very thin crust on the outside. But
remember its thickness is a thickness of time. It's about seventy years thick in the best places. We are
born on the surface of it and all our lives we are sinking through it. When we've got all the way through
then we are what's called Dead: we've got into the dark part inside, the real globe. If your God exists.
He's not in the globe-He's outside, like a moon. As we pass into the interior we pass out of His ken. He
doesn't follow us in. You would express it by saying He's not in time-which you think comforting! In
other words He stays put: out in the light and air, outside. But we are in time. We 'move with the times'.
That is, from His point of view, we move away, into what He regards as nonentity, where He never
follows. That is all there is to us, all there ever was. He may be there in what you call 'Life', or He may
not. What difference does it make? We're not going to be there for long!"
"That could hardly be the whole story," said Ransom. "If the whole universe were like that, then we,
being parts of it, would feel at home in such a universe. The very fact that it strikes us as monstrous--"
"Yes," interrupted Weston, "that would be all very well if it wasn't that reasoning itself is only valid as
long as you stay in the rind. It has nothing to do with the real universe. Even the ordinary scientists-like
what I used to be myself-are beginning to find that out. Haven't you see the real meaning of all this
modem stuff about the dangers of extrapolation and bent space and the indeterminacy of the atom? They
don't say it in so many words, of course, but what they're getting to, even before they die nowadays, is
what all men get to when they're dead-the knowledge that reality is neither rational nor consistent nor
anything else. In a sense you might say it isn't there. 'Real' and 'Unreal', 'true' and 'false'-they're all only
on the surface. They give way the moment you press them."
"If all this were true," said Ransom, "what would be the point of saying it?"
"Or of anything else?" replied Weston. "The only point in anything is that there isn't any point. Why do
ghosts want to frighten? Because they are ghosts. What else is there to do?"
"I get the idea," said Ransom. "That the account a man gives of the universe, or of any other building,
depends very much on where he is standing."
"But specially," said Weston, "on whether he's inside or out. All the things you like to dwell upon are
outsides. A planet like our own, or like Perelandra, for instance. Or a beautiful human body. All the
colours and pleasant shapes are merely where it ends, where it ceases to be. Inside, what do you get?
Darkness, worms, heat, pressure, salt, suffocation, stink."
They ploughed forward for a few minutes in silence over waves which were now growing larger. The
fish seemed to be making little headway.
"Of course you don't care," said Weston. "What do you people in the rind care about us? You haven't
been pulled down yet. It's like a dream I once had, though I didn't know then how true it was. I dreamed
I was lying dead-you know, nicely laid out in the ward in a nursing home with my face settled by the
undertaker and big lilies in the room. And then a sort of a person who was all falling to bits-like a tramp,
you know, only it was himself not his clothes that was coming to pieces-came and stood at the foot of
the bed, just hating me. 'All right,' he said, 'all right. You think you're mighty fine with your clean sheet
and your shiny coffin being got ready. I began like that. We all did. Just wait and see what you come
down to in the end.' "
"Really," said Ransom, "I think you might just as well shut up."
"Then there's Spiritualism," said Weston, ignoring this suggestion. "I used to think it all nonsense. But it
isn't. It's all true. You've noticed that all pleasant accounts of the dead are traditional or philosophical?
What actual experiment discovers is quite different. Ectoplasm-slimy films coming out of a medium's
belly and making great, chaotic, tumbledown faces. Automatic writing producing reams of rubbish."
"Are you Weston?" said Ransom, suddenly turning upon;
his companion. The persistent mumbling voice, so articulate that you had to listen to it and yet so
inarticulate that you had to strain your ears to follow what it said, was beginning to madden him.
"Don't be angry," said the voice. "There's no good being angry with me. I thought you might be sorry.
My God, Ransom, it's awful. You don't understand; Right down under layers and layers. Buried alive.
You try to connect things and can't. They take your head off... and you can't even look back on what life
was like in the rind, because you know it never did mean anything even from the beginning."
"What are you?" cried Ransom. "How do you know what death is like? God knows, I'd help you if I
could. But give me the facts. Where have you been these few days?" "Hush," said the other suddenly,
"what's that?" Ransom listened. Certainly there did seem to be a new, element in the great concourse of
noises with which they were surrounded. At first he could not define it. The seas were very big now and
the wind was strong. All at once his companion reached out his hand and clutched Ransom's arm.
"Oh, my God!" he cried. "Oh, Ransom, Ransom! We shall be killed. Killed and put back under the rind.
Ransom, you promised to help me. Don't let them get me again."
"Shut up," said Ransom in disgust, for the creature was wailing and blubbering so that he could hear
nothing else: and he wanted very much to identify the deeper note that had mingled with the piping wind
and roar of water.
"Breakers," said Weston, "breakers, you fool! Can't you hear? There's a country over there! There's a
rocky coast. Look there-no, to your right. We shall be smashed into a jelly. Look-0 God, here comes the
dark!"
And the dark came. Horror of death such as he had never known, horror of the terrified creature at his
side, descended upon Ransom: finally, horror with no definite object. In a few minutes he could see
through the jet-black night the luminous cloud of foam. From the way in which it shot steeply upward he
judged it was breaking on cliffs. Invisible birds, with a shriek and flurry, passed low overhead.
"Are you there, Weston?" he shouted. "What cheer? Pull yourself together. All that stuff you've been
talking is lunacy. Say a child'& prayer if you can't say a man's. Repent your sins. Take my hand. There
are hundreds of mere boys on Earth facing death this moment. We'll do very well."
His hand was clutched in the darkness, rather more firmly than he wished. "I can't bear it, I can't bear it,"
came Weston's
voice.
"Steady now. None of that," he shouted back, for Weston had suddenly gripped his arm with both hands.
"I can't bear it," came the voice again.
"Hi!" said Ransom. "Let go. What the devil are you doing?"-and as he spoke strong arms had plucked
him from the saddle, had wrapped him round in a terrible embrace just below his thighs, and, clutching
uselessly at the smooth surface of the fish's body, he was dragged down. The waters closed over his
head: and still his enemy pulled him down into the warm depth, and down farther yet to where it was no
longer warm.
"I CAN'T hold my breath any longer," thought Ransom. "I can't. I can't." Cold slimy things slid upwards
over his agonised body. He decided to stop holding his breath, to open his mouth and die, but his will
did not obey this decision. Not only his chest but his temples felt as if they were going to burst. It was
idle to struggle. His arms met no adversary and his legs were pinioned. He became aware that they were
moving upwards. But this gave him no hope. The surface was too far away, he could not hold out till
they reached it. In the immediate presence of death all ideas of the after life were withdrawn from his
mind. The mere abstract proposition, 'This is a man dying' floated before him in an unemotional way.
Suddenly a roar of sound rushed back upon his ears- intolerable boomings and clangings. His mouth
opened automatically. He was breathing again. In a pitch darkness full of echoes he was clutching what
seemed to be gravel and kicking wildly to throw off the grip that still held his legs. Then he was free and
fighting once more: a blind struggle half in and half out of the water on what seemed to be a pebbly
beach, with sharper rocks here and there that cut his feet and elbows. The blackness was filled with
gasping curses, now in his own voice, now in Weston's, with yelps of pain, thudding concussions, and
the noise of laboured breath. In the end he was astride of the enemy. He pressed its sides between his
knees till its ribs cracked and clasped his hands round its throat. Somehow he was able to resist its fierce
tearing at his arms-to keep on pressing. Once before he had had to press like this, but that had been on an
artery, to save life, not to kill. It seemed to last for ages. Long after the creature's struggles had ceased he
did not dare to relax his grip. Even when he was quite sure that it breathed no longer he retained his seat
on its chest and kept his tired hands, though now loosely, on its throat. He was nearly fainting himself,
but he 'counted a thousand before he would shift his posture. Even then he continued to sit on its body.
He did not know whether in the last few hours the spirit which had spoken to him was really Weston's or
whether he had been the victim of a ruse. Indeed, it made little difference.
There was, no doubt, a confusion of persons in damnation:
what Pantheists falsely hoped of Heaven bad men really received in Hell. They were melted down into
their Master, as a lead soldier slips down and loses his shape in the ladle held over the gas ring. The
question whether Satan, or one whom Satan has digested, is acting on any given occasion, has in the
long run no clear significance. In the meantime, the great thing was not to be tricked again.
There was nothing to be done, then, except to wait for the morning. From the roar of echoes all about
him he concluded that they were in a very narrow bay between cliffs. How they had ever made it was a
mystery. The morning must be many hours distant. This was a considerable nuisance. He determined not
to leave the body till he had examined it by daylight and perhaps taken further steps to make sure that it
could not be re-animated. Till then he must pass the time as best he could. The pebbly beach was not
very comfortable, and when he tried to lean back he found a jagged wall. Fortunately he was so tired that
for a time the mere fact of sitting still contented him. But this phase passed.
He tried to make the best of it. He determined to give up guessing how the time was going. 'The only
safe answer,' he told himself, 'is to think of the earliest hour you can suppose possible, and then assume
the real time is two hours earlier than that.' He beguiled himself by recapitulating the whole story of his
adventure in Perelandra. He recited all that he could remember of the Iliad, the Odyssey, the Aenid, the
Chanson de Roland, Paradise Lost, the Kalevala, the Hunting of the Snark, and a rhyme about Germanic
sound-laws which he had composed as a freshman. He tried to spend as long as he could hunting for the
lines he could not remember. He set himself a chess problem. He tried to rough out a chapter for a book
he was writing. But it was all rather a failure.
These things went on, alternating with periods of dogged inactivity, until it seemed to him that he could
hardly remember a time before that night. He could scarcely believe that even to a bored and wakeful
man twelve hours could appear so long. And the noise-the gritty slipper discomfort! It was very odd,
now he came to think of it, that this country should have none of those sweet night breezes which he had
met everywhere else in Perelandra. It was odd too (but this thought came to him what seemed hours
later) that he had not even the phosphorescent wave-crests to feed his eyes on. Very slowly a possible
explanation of both facts dawned upon him: and it would also explain why the darkness lasted so long.
The idea was too terrible for any indulgence of fear. Controlling himself, he rose stiffly to his feet and
began picking his steps along the beach. His progress was very slow: but presently his outstretched arms
touched perpendicular rock. He stood on tiptoe and stretched his hands up as far as he could. They found
nothing but rock. 'Don't get the wind up,' he said to himself. He started groping his way back. He came
to the Un-man's body, passed it, and went beyond it round the opposite beach. It curved rapidly, and
here, before he had gone twenty steps his hands-which he was holding above his head-met, not a wall,
but a roof, of rock. A few paces farther and it was lower. Then he had to stoop. A little later and he had
to go on his hands and knees. It was obvious that the roof came down and finally met the beach.
Sick with despair he felt his way back to the body and sat down. The truth was now beyond doubt. There
was no good waiting for the morning. There would be no morning here till the end of the world, and
perhaps he had already waited a night and a day. The clanging echoes, the dead air, the very smell of the
place, all confirmed this. He and his enemy when they sank had clearly, by some hundredth chance,
been carried through a hole in the cliffs well below water-level and come up on the beach of a cavern.
Was it possible to reverse the process? He went down to the water's edge-or rather as he groped his way
down to where the shingle was wet, the water came to meet him. It thundered over his head and far up
behind him, and then receded with a tug which he only resisted by spread-eagling himself on the beach
and gripping the stones. It would be useless to plunge into that-he would merely have his ribs broken
against the opposite wall of the cave. If one had light, and a high place to dive from, it was just
conceivable one might get down to the bottom and strike the exit. . . but very doubtful. And anyway, one
had no light.
Although the air was not very good he supposed that his prison must be supplied with air from
somewhere-but whether from any aperture that he could possibly reach was another matter. He turned at
once and began exploring the rock behind the beach. At first it seemed hopeless, but the conviction that
caves may lead you anywhere dies hard, and after some time his groping hands found a shelf about three
feet high. He stepped up on it. He had expected it to be only a few inches deep but his hands could find
no wall before him. Very cautiously he took some paces forward. His right foot touched something
sharp. He whistled with the pain and went on even more cautiously. Then he found vertical rock- smooth
as high as he could reach. He turned to his right and presently lost it. He turned left and began to go
forward again and almost at once stubbed his toe. After nursing it for a moment he went down on hands
and knees. He seemed to be among boulders, but the way was practicable. For ten minutes or so he made
fairly good going, pretty steeply upward, sometimes on slippery shingle, sometimes over the tops of the
big stones. Then he came to another cliff. There appeared to be a shelf on this about four feet up, but this
time a really shallow one. He got on to it somehow and glued himself to the face, feeling out to left and
right for further grips.
When he found one and realised that he was now about to attempt some real climbing, he hesitated. He
remembered that what was above him might be a cliff which even in daylight and properly clothed he
would never dare to attempt: but hope whispered that it might equally well be only seven feet high and
that a few minutes of coolness might bring him into those gently winding passages up into the heart of
the mountain which had, by now, won such a firm place in his imagination. He decided to go on. What
worried him was not, in fact, the fear of falling, but the fear of cutting himself off from the water.
Starvation he thought he could face: not thirst. But he went on. For some minutes he did things which he
had never done on Earth. Doubtless he was in one way helped by the darkness: he had no real sensation
of height and no giddiness. On the other hand, to work by touch alone made crazy climbing. Doubtless if
anyone had seen him he would have appeared at one moment to take mad risks and at another to indulge
in excessive caution. He tried to keep out of his mind the possibility that he might be climbing merely
towards a roof.
After about quarter of an hour he found himself on a wide horizontal surface-either a much deeper shelf
or the top of the precipice. He rested here for a while and licked his cuts. Then he got up and felt his way
forwards, expecting every moment to meet another rock wall. When, after about thirty paces, he had not
done so, he tried shouting and judged from the sound that he was in a fairly open place. Then he
continued. The floor was of small pebble and ascended fairly steeply. There were some larger stones but
he had learned to curl up his toes as his foot felt for the next place and he seldom stubbed them now.
One minor trouble was that even in this perfect blackness he could not help straining his eyes to see. It
gave him a headache and created phantom lights and colours.
This slow uphill trek through darkness lasted so long that he began to fear he was going round in a
circle, or that he had blundered into some gallery which ran on for ever beneath the surface of the planet.
The steady ascent in some degree reassured him. The starvation for light became very painful. He found
himself thinking about light as a hungry man thinks about food-picturing April hillsides with milky
clouds racing over them in blue skies or quiet circles of lamplight on tables pleasantly littered with
books and pipes. By a curious confusion of mind he found it impossible not to imagine that the slope he
walked on was not merely dark, but black in its own right, as if with soot. He felt that his feet and hands
must be blackened by touching it. Whenever he pictured himself arriving at any light, he also pictured
that light revealing a world of soot all around him.
He struck his head sharply against something and sat down half stunned. When he had collected himself
he found by groping that the shingle slope had run up into a roof of smooth rock. His heart was very low
as he sat there digesting this discovery. The sound of the waves came up faint and melancholy from
below and told him that he was now at a great height. At last, though with very little hope, he began
walking to his right, keeping contact with the roof by raising his arms. Presently it receded beyond his
reach. A long time after that he heard a sound of water. He went on more slowly in great fear of
encountering a waterfall. The shingle began to be wet and finally he stood in a little pool. Turning to his
left he found, indeed, a waterfall, but it was a tiny stream with no force of water that could endanger
him. He knelt in the rippling pool and drank from the fall and put his aching head and weary shoulders
under it. Then, greatly refreshed, he tried to work his way up it.
Though the stones were slippery with some kind of moss and many of the pools were deep, it presented
no serious difficulties. In about twenty minutes he had reached the top, and as far as he could judge by
shouting and noticing the echo he was now in a very large cave indeed. He took the stream for guidance
and proceeded to follow it up. In that featureless dark it was some sort of company. Some real hopedistinct
from that mere convention of hope which supports men in desperate situations-began to enter his
mind.
It was shortly after this that he began to be worried by the noises. The last faint booming of the sea in the
little hole whence he had set out so many hours ago had now died away and the predominant sound was
the gentle tinkling of the stream. But he now began to think that he heard other noises mixed with it.
Sometimes it would be a dull plump as if something had slipped into one of the pools behind him:
sometimes, more mysteriously, a dry rattling sound as if metal were being dragged over the stones. At
first he put it down to imagination. Then he stopped once or twice to listen and heard nothing;
but each time when he went on it began again. At last, stopping once more, he heard it quite
unmistakably. Could it be that the Un-man had after all come to life and was still following him? But
that seemed improbable, for its whole plan had been to escape. It was not so easy to dispose of the other
possibility -that these caverns might have inhabitants. All his experience, indeed, assured him that if
there were such inhabitants they would probably be harmless, but somehow he could not quite believe
that anything which lived in such a place would be agreeable, and a little echo of the Un-man's-or was it
Weston's-talk came back to him. "All beautiful on the surface, but down inside-darkness, heat, horror,
and stink." Then it occurred to him that if some creature were following him up the stream it might be
well for him to leave its banks and wait till the creature had gone past. But if it were hunting him it
would presumably hunt by scent; and in any case he would not risk losing the stream. In the end he went
on.
Whether through weakness-for he was now very hungry indeed-or because the noises behind made him
involuntarily quicken his pace, he found himself unpleasantly hot, and even the stream did not appear
very refreshing when he put his feet in it. He began to think that whether he were pursued or not he must
have a short rest-but just at that moment he saw the light. His eyes had been mocked so often before that
he would not at first believe it. He shut them while he counted a hundred and looked again. He turned
round and sat down for several minutes, praying that it might not be a delusion, and looked again.
"Well," said Ransom, "if it is a delusion, it's a pretty stubborn one." A very dim, tiny, quivering
luminosity, slightly red in colour, was before him. It was too weak to illuminate anything else and in that
world of blackness he could not tell whether it was five feet or five miles away. He set out at once, with
beating heart. Thank Heaven, the stream appeared to be leading him towards it.
While he thought it was still a long way off he found himself almost stepping into it. It was a circle of
light lying on the surface of the water, which thereabouts formed a deepish trembling pool. It came from
above. Stepping into the pool he looked up. An irregularly shaped patch of light, now quite distinctly
red, was immediately above him. This time it was strong enough to show him the objects immediately
around it, and when his eyes had mastered them he perceived that he was looking up a funnel or fissure.
Its lower aperture lay in the roof of his own cavern which must here be only a few feet above his head:
its upper aperture was obviously in the floor of a separate and higher chamber whence the light came.
He could see the uneven side of the funnel, dimly illuminated, and clothed with pads and streamers of a
jelly-like and rather unpleasing vegetation. Down this water was trickling and falling on his head and
shoulders in a warm rain. This warmth, together with the red colour of the light, suggested that the upper
cave was illuminated by subterranean fire. It will not be clear to the reader, and it was not clear to
Ransom when he thought about it afterwards, why he immediately decided to get into the upper cave if
he possibly could. What really moved him, he thinks, was the mere hunger for light. The very first
glance at the funnel restored dimensions and perspective to his world, and this in itself was like delivery
from prison. It seemed to tell him far more than it actually did of his surroundings: it gave him back that
whole frame of spatial directions without which a man seems hardly able to call his body his own. After
this, any return to the horrible black vacancy, the world of soot and grime, the world without size or
distance, in which he had been wandering, was out of the question. Perhaps also he had some idea that
whatever was following him would cease to follow if he could get into the lighted cave.
But it was not easy to do. He could not reach the opening of the funnel. Even when he jumped he only
just touched the fringe of its vegetation. At last he hit upon an unlikely plan which was the best he could
think of. There was just enough light here for him to see a number of larger stones among the gravel,
and he set to work to build up a pile in the centre of the pool. He worked rather feverishly and often had
to undo what he had done: and he tried it several times before it was really high enough. When at last it
was completed and he stood sweating and shaky on the summit the real hazard was still to be run. He
had to grip the vegetation on each side above his head, trusting to luck that it would hold, and half jump,
half pull himself up as quickly as he could, since if it held at all it would, he felt sure, not hold for long.
Somehow or other he managed it. He got himself wedged into the fissure with his back against one side
and his feet against the other, like a mountaineer in what is called a chimney. The thick squashy growth
protected his skin, and after a few upward struggles he found the walls of the passage so irregular that it
could be climbed in the ordinary way. The heat increased rapidly. "I'm a fool to have come up here,"
said Ransom: but even as he said so, he was at the top.
At first he was blinded by the light. When at last he could take in his surroundings he found himself in a
vast hall so filled with firelight that it gave him the impression of being hollowed out of red clay. He was
looking along the length of it. The floor sloped down to the left side. On his right it sloped upward to
what appeared a cliff edge, beyond which was an abyss of blinding brightness. A broad shallow river
was flowing down the middle of the cavern. The roof was so high as to be invisible, but the walls soared
up into the darkness with broad curves like the roots of a beech tree.
He staggered to his feet, splashed across the river (which was hot to the touch) and approached the cliff
edge. The fire appeared to be thousands of feet below him and he could not see the other side of the pit
in which it swelled and roared and writhed. His eyes could only bear it for a second or so, and when he
turned away the rest of the cavern seemed dark. The heat of his body was painful. He drew away from
the cliff edge and sat down with his back to the fire to collect his thoughts.
They were collected in an unlooked-for way. Suddenly and irresistibly, like an attack by tanks, that
whole view of the universe which Weston (if it were Weston) had so lately preached to him, took all but
complete possession of his mind. He seemed to see that he had been living all his life in a world of
illusion. The ghosts, the damned ghosts, were right. The beauty of Perelandra, the innocence of the
Lady, the sufferings of saints, and the kindly affections of men, were all only an appearance and outward
show. What he had called the worlds were but the skins of the worlds: a quarter of a mile beneath the
surface, and from thence through thousands of miles of dark and silence and infernal fire, to the very
heart of each. Reality lived-the meaningless, the unmade, the omnipotent idiocy to which all spirits were
irrelevant and before which all efforts were vain. Whatever was following him would come up that wet,
dark hole, would presently be excreted by that hideous duct, and then he would die. He fixed his eyes
upon the dark opening from which he had himself just emerged. And then- "I thought as much," said
Ransom.
Slowly, shakily, with unnatural and inhuman movements a human form, scarlet in the firelight, crawled
out on to the floor of the cave. It was the Un-man, of course: dragging its broken leg and with its lower
jaw sagging open like that of a corpse, it raised itself to a standing position. And then, close behind it,
something else came up out of the hole. First came what looked like branches of trees, and then seven or
eight spots of light, irregularly grouped like a constellation. Then a tubular mass which reflected the red
glow as if it were polished. His heart gave a great leap as the branches suddenly resolved themselves
into long wiry feelers and the dotted lights became the many eyes of a shell-helmeted head and the mass
that followed it was revealed as a large roughly cylindrical body. Horrible things followed-angular,
many jointed legs, and presently, when he thought the whole body was in sight, a second body came
following it and after that a third. The thing was in three parts, united only by a kind of wasp's waist
structure- three parts that did not seem to be truly aligned and made it look as if it had been trodden on-a
huge, many legged, quivering deformity, standing just behind the Un-man so that the horrible shadows
of both danced in enormous and united menace on the wall of rock behind them.
'They want to frighten me,* said something in Ransom's brain, and at the same moment he became
convinced both that the Un-man had summoned this great earth crawler and also that the evil thoughts
which had preceded the appearance of the enemy had been poured into his own mind by the enemy's
will. The knowledge that his thoughts could be thus managed from without did not awake terror but
rage. Ransom found that he had risen, that he was approaching the Un-man, that he was saying things,
perhaps foolish things, in English. "Do you think I'm going to stand this?" he yelled. "Get out of my
brain. It isn't yours, I tell you! get out of it." As he shouted he had picked up a big, jagged stone from
beside the stream. "Ransom," croaked the Un-man, "wait! We're both trapped . . ." but Ransom was
already upon it.
"In the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, here goes-I mean Amen," said
Ransom, and hurled the stone as hard as he could into the Un-man's face. The Unman fell as a pencil
falls, the face smashed out of all recognition. Ransom did not give it a glance but turned to face the other
horror. But where had the horror gone? The creature was there, a curiously shaped creature no doubt, but
all the loathing had vanished clean out of his mind, so that neither then nor at any other time could he
remember it, nor ever understand again why one should quarrel with an animal for having more legs or
eyes than oneself. All that he had felt from childhood about insects and reptiles died that moment: died
utterly, as hideous music dies when you switch off the wireless. Apparently it had all, even from the
beginning, been a dark enchantment of the enemy's. Once, as he had sat writing near an open window in
Cambridge, he had looked up and shuddered to see, as he supposed, a many coloured beetle of unusually
hideous shape crawling across his paper. A second glance showed him that it was a dead leaf, moved by
the breeze; and instantly the very curves and re-entrants which had made its ugliness turned into its
beauties. At this moment he had almost the same sensation. He saw at once that the creature intended
him no harm-had indeed no intentions at all. It had been drawn thither by the Un-man, and now stood
still, tentatively moving its antennae. Then, apparently not liking its surroundings, it turned laboriously
round and began descending into the hole by which it had come. As he saw the last section of its
tripartite body wobble on the edge of the aperture, and then finally tip upward with its torpedo-shaped
tail in the air, Ransom almost laughed. "Like an animated corridor train" was his comment.
He turned to the Un-man. It had hardly anything left that you could call a head, but he thought it better
to take no risks. He took it by its ankles and lugged it up to the edge of the cliff:
then, after resting a few seconds, he shoved it over. He saw its shape black, for a second, against the sea
of fire: and then that was the end of it.
He rolled rather than crawled back to the stream and drank deeply. 'This may be the end of me or it may
not,' thought Ransom. 'There may be a way out of these caves or there may not. But I won't go another
step further today. Not if it was to save my life-not to save my life. That's flat. Glory be to God. I'm
tired.' A second later he was asleep.
FOR the rest of the subterranean journey after his long sleep in the fire lit cave. Ransom was somewhat
light-headed with hunger and fatigue. He remembers lying still after he woke for what seemed many
hours and even debating with himself whether it was worth going on. The actual moment of decision has
vanished from his mind. Pictures come back in a chaotic, disjointed fashion. There was a long gallery
open to the fire-pit on one side and a terrible place where clouds of steam went up for ever and ever.
Doubtless one of the many torrents that roared in the neighbourhood here fell into the depth of the fire.
Beyond that were great halls still dimly illuminated and full of unknown mineral wealth that sparkled
and danced in the light and mocked his eyes as if he were exploring a hall of mirrors by the help of a
pocket torch. It seemed to him also, though this may have been delirium, that he came through a vast
cathedral space which was more like the work of art than that of Nature, with two great thrones at one
end and chairs on either hand too large for human occupants. If the things were real, he never found any
explanation of them. There was a dark tunnel in which a wind from Heaven knows where was blowing
and drove sand in his face. There was also a place where he himself walked in darkness and looked
down through fathom below fathom of shafts and natural arches and winding gulfs on to a smooth floor
lit with a cold green light. And as he stood and looked it seemed to him that four of the great earthbeetles,
dwarfed by distance to the size of gnats, and crawling two by two, came slowly into sight. And
they were drawing behind them a flat car, and on the car, upright, unshaken, stood a mantled form, huge
and still and slender. And driving its strange team it passed on with insufferable majesty and went out of
sight. Assuredly the inside of this world was not for man. But it was for something. And it appeared to
Ransom that there might, if a man could find it, be some way to renew the old Pagan practice of
propitiating the local gods of unknown places in such fashion that it was no offence to God Himself but
only a prudent and courteous apology for trespass. That thing, that swathed form in its chariot, was no
doubt his fellow creature. It did not follow that they were equals or had an equal right in the underland.
A long time after this came the drumming-the boom-ba-ba-ba-boom-boom out of pitch darkness, distant
at first, then all around him, then dying away after endless prolongation of echoes in the black labyrinth.
Then came the fountain of cold light-a column, as of water, shining with some radiance of its own, and
pulsating, and never any nearer however long he travelled and at last suddenly eclipsed. He did not find
what it was. And so, after more strangeness and grandeur and labour than I can tell, there came a
moment when his feet slid without warning on clay-a wild grasp-a spasm of terror-and he was
spluttering and struggling in deep, swift-flowing water. He thought that even if he escaped being
battered to death against the walls of the channel he would presently plunge along with the stream into
the pit of fire. But the channel must have been very straight and the current was less violent than he had
supposed. At all events he never touched the sides. He lay helpless, in the end, rushing forward through
echoing darkness. It lasted a long time.
You will understand that what with expectation of death, and weariness, and the great noise, he was
confused in mind. Looking back on the adventure afterwards it seemed to him that he floated out of
blackness into greyness and then into an inexplicable chaos of semi-transparent blues and greens and
whites. There was a hint of arches above his head and faintly shining columns, but all vague and all
obliterating one another as soon as seen. It looked like a cave of ice, but it was too warm for that. And
the roof above him seemed to be itself rippling like water, but this was doubtless a reflection. A moment
later and he was rushed out into broad daylight and air and warmth, and rolled head over heels, and
deposited, dazzled and breathless, in the shallows of a great pool.
He was now almost too weak to move. Something in the air, and the wide silence which made a
background to the lonely crying of birds, told him that he was on a high mountain top. He rolled rather
than crawled out of the pool on to sweet blue turf. Looking back whence he had come he saw a river
pouring from the mouth of a cave, a cave that seemed indeed to be made of ice. Under it the water was
spectral blue, but near where he lay it was warm amber. There was mist and freshness and dew all about
him. At his side rose a cliff mantled with streamers of bright vegetation, but gleaming like glass where
its own surface showed through. But this he heeded little. There were rich clusters of a grape-like fruit
glowing under the little -pointed leaves, and he could reach them without getting up. Eating passed into
sleeping by a transition he could never remember.
At this point it becomes increasingly difficult to give Ransom's experiences in any certain order. How
long he lay beside the river at the cavern mouth eating and sleeping and waking only to eat and sleep
again, he has no idea. He thinks it was only a day or two, but from the state of his body when this period
of convalescence ended I should imagine it must have been more like a fortnight or three weeks. It was a
time to be remembered only in dreams as we remember infancy. Indeed it was a second infancy, in
which he was breast-fed by the planet Venus herself: unweaned till he moved from that place. Three
impressions of this long Sabbath remain. One is the endless sound of rejoicing water. Another is the
delicious life that he sucked from the clusters which almost seemed to bow themselves unasked into his
up-stretched hands. The third is the song. Now high in air above him, now welling up as if from glens
and valleys far below, it floated through his sleep and was the first sound at every waking. It was
formless as the song of a bird, yet it was not a bird's voice. As a bird's voice is to a flute, so this was to a
'cello: low and ripe and tender, full-bellied, rich and golden-brown: passionate too, but not with the
passions of men.
Because he was weaned so gradually from this state of rest I cannot give his impressions of the place he
lay in, bit by bit, as he came to take it in. But when he was cured and his mind was clear again, this was
what he saw. The cliffs out of which his river had broken through the cave were not of ice, but of some
kind of translucent rock. Any little splinter broken off them was as transparent as glass, but the cliffs
themselves, when you looked at them dose, seemed to become opaque about six inches from the surface.
If you waded upstream into the cave and then turned back and looked towards the light, the edges of the
arch which formed the cave's mouth were distinctly transparent: and everything looked blue inside the
cave. He did not know what happened at the top of these cliffs.
Before him the lawn of blue turf continued level for about thirty paces, and then dropped with a steep
slope, leading the river down in a series of cataracts. The slope was covered with flowers which shook
continually in a light breeze. It went down a long way and ended in a winding and wooded valley which
curled out of sight on his right hand round a majestic slope; but beyond that, lower down-so much lower
down as to be almost incredible-one caught the point of mountain tops, and beyond that, fainter yet, the
hint of still lower valleys, and then a vanishing of everything in golden haze. On the opposite side of this
valley the earth leaped up in great sweeps and folds of almost Himalayan height to the red rocks. They
were not red like Devonshire cliffs: they were true rose-red, as if they had been painted. Their brightness
astonished him, and so did the needle-like sharpness of their spires, until it occurred to him that he was
in a young world and that these mountains might, geologically speaking, be in their infancy. Also, they
might be farther off than they looked.
To his left and behind him the crystal cliffs shut off his view. To his right they soon ended and beyond
them the ground rose to another and nearer peak-a much lower one than those he saw across the valley.
The fantastic steepness of all the slopes confirmed his idea that he was on a very young mountain.
Except for the song it was all very still. When he saw birds flying they were usually a long way below
him. On the slopes to his right and, less distinctly, on the slope of the great massif which faced him,
there was a continual rippling effect which he could not account for. It was like water flowing: but since,
if it were a stream on the remoter mountain, it would have to be a stream two or three miles wide, this
seemed improbable.
In trying to put the completed picture together I have omitted something which, in fact, made it a long
job for Ransom to get that picture. The whole place was subject to mist. It kept on vanishing in a veil of
saffron or very pale gold and reappearing again-almost as if the golden sky-roof, which looked only a
few feet above the mountain-tops, were opening and pouring down riches upon the world.
Day by day as he came to know more of the place. Ransom also came to know more of the state of his
own body. For a long time he was too stiff almost to move and even an incautious breath made him
wince. It healed, however, surprisingly quickly. But just as a man who has had a fall only discovers the
real hurt when the minor bruises and cuts are less painful, so Ransom was nearly well before he detected
his most serious injury. It was a wound in his heel. The shape made it quite clear that the wound had
been inflicted by human teeth-the nasty, blunt teeth of our own species which crush and grind more than
they cut. Oddly enough, he had no recollection of this particular bite in any of his innumerable tussles
with the Un-man. It did not look unhealthy, but it was still bleeding. It was not bleeding at all fast, but
nothing he could do would stop it. But he worried very little about this. Neither the future nor the past
really concerned him at this period. Wishing and fearing were modes of consciousness for which he
seemed to have lost the faculty.
Nevertheless there came a day when he felt the need of some activity and yet did not feel ready to leave
the little lair between the pool and the cliff which had become like a home. He employed that day in
doing something which may appear rather foolish and yet at the time it seemed to him that he could
hardly omit it. He had discovered that the substance of the translucent cliffs was not very hard. Now he
took a sharp stone of a different kind, and cleared a wide space on the cliff wall of vegetation. Then he
made measurements and spaced it all out carefully and after a few hours had produced the following.
The language was Old Solar but the letters were Roman.
WITHIN THESE CAVES WAS BURNED THE BODY OF EDWARD ROLLES WESTON. A
LEARNED HNAU OF THE WORLD WHICH THOSE WHO INHABIT IT CALL TELLUS BUT THE
ELDILA THULCANDRA. HE WAS BORN WHEN TELLUS HAD COMPLETED ONE
THOUSAND EIGHT HUNDRED AND NINETY-SIX REVOLUTIONS ABOUT ARBOL. SINCE
THE TIME WHEN MALELDIL BLESSED BE HE WAS BORN AS A HNAU IN THULCANDRA.
HE STUDIED THE PROPERTIES OF BODIES AND FIRST OF THE TELLURIANS TRAVELLED
THROUGH DEEP HEAVEN TO MALACANDRA AND TO PERELANDRA WHERE HE GAVE UP
HIS WILL AND REASON TO THE BENT ELDIL WHEN TELLUS WAS MAKING THE ONE
THOUSANDTH NINE HUNDREDTH AND FORTY-SECOND REVOLUTION AFTER THE BIRTH
OF MALELDIL BLESSED BE HE.
"That was a tomfool thing to do," said Ransom to himself contentedly as he lay down again. "No one
will ever read it. But there ought to be some record. He was a great physicist after all. Anyway, it has
given me some exercise." He yawned prodigiously and settled down to yet another twelve hours of sleep.
The next day he was better and began taking little walks, not going down but strolling to and fro on the
hillside on each side of the cave. The following day he was better still. But on the third day he was well,
and ready for adventures.
He set out very early in the morning and began to follow the watercourse down the hill. The slope was
very steep but there were no outcroppings of rock and the turf was soft and springy and to his surprise he
found that the descent brought no weariness to his knees. When he had been going about half an hour
and the peaks of the opposite mountain were now too high to see and the crystal cliffs behind him were
only a distant glare, he came to a new kind of vegetation. He was approaching a forest of little trees
whose trunks were only about two and a half feet high; but from the top of each trunk there grew long
streamers which did not rise in the air but flowed in the wind downhill and parallel to the ground. Thus,
when he went in among them, he found himself wading knee-deep and more in a continually rippling
sea of them-a sea which presently tossed all about him as far as his eye could reach. It was blue in
colour, but far lighter than the blue of the turf-almost a Cambridge blue at the centre of each streamer,
but dying away at their tasselled and feathery edges into a delicacy of bluish grey which it would take
the subtlest effects of smoke and cloud to rival in our world. The soft, almost impalpable, caresses of the
long thin leaves on his flesh, the low, singing, rustling, whispering music, and the frolic movement all
about him, began to set his heart beating with that almost formidable sense of delight which he had felt
before in Perelandra. He realised that these dwarf forests-these ripple trees as he now christened themwere
the explanation of that water-like movement he had seen on the farther slopes.
When he was tired he sat down and found himself at once in a new world. The streamers now flowed
above his head. He was in a forest made for dwarfs, a forest with a blue transparent roof, continually
moving and casting an endless dance of lights and shades upon its mossy floor. And presently he saw
that it was indeed made for dwarfs. Through the moss, which here was of extraordinary fineness, he saw
the hithering and thithering of what at first he took for insects but what proved, on closer inspection, to
be tiny mammals. There were many mountain mice, exquisite scale models of those he had seen on the
Forbidden Island, each about the size of a bumble bee. There were little miracles of grace which looked
more like horses than anything he had yet seen on this world, though they resembled proto-hippos rather
than his modern representative.
"How can I avoid treading on thousands of these?" he wondered. But they were not really very
numerous and the main crowd of them seemed to be all moving away on his left. When he made to rise
he noticed that there were already very few of them in sight.
He continued to wade down through the rippling streamers (it was like a sort of vegetable surf-bathing)
for about an hour longer. Then he came into woods and presently to a river with a rocky course flowing
across his path to the right. He had, in fact, reached the wooded valley, and knew that the ground which
sloped upwards through trees on the far side of the water was the beginning of the great ascent. Here
was amber shade and solemn height under the forest roof, and rocks wet with cataracts, and, over all, the
noise of that deep singing. It was so loud now and so full of melody that he went downstream, a little out
of his way, to look for its origin. This brought him almost at once out of stately aisles and open glades
into a different kind of wood. Soon he was pressing his way through thornless thickets, all in bloom. His
head was covered with the petals that showered on it, his sides gilded with pollen. Much that his fingers
touched was gummy and at each pace his contact with soil and bush appeared to wake new odours that
darted into his brain and there begot wild and enormous pleasures. The noise was very loud now and the
thicket very dense so that he could not see a yard ahead, when the music stopped suddenly. There was a
sound of rustling and broken twigs and he made hastily in that direction, but found nothing. He had
almost decided to give up the search when the song began again a little farther away. Once more he
made after it; once more the creature stopped singing and evaded him. He must have played thus at hideand-seek
with it for the best part of an hour before his search was rewarded.
Treading delicately during one of the loudest bursts of music he at last saw through the flowery branches
a black something. Standing still whenever it stopped singing, and advancing with great caution
whenever it began again, he stalked it for ten minutes. At last it was in full view, and singing, and
ignorant that it was watched. It sat upright like a dog, black and sleek and shiny, but its shoulders were
high above Ransom's head, and the forelegs on which they were pillared were like young trees and the
wide soft pads on which they rested were large as those of a camel. The enormous rounded belly was
where Ransom stood-the mouth wide open as it sang of joy in thick-coming trills, and the music almost
visibly rippled in its glossy throat. He stared in wonder at the wide liquid eyes and the quivering,
sensitive nostrils. Then the creatures stopped, saw him, and darted away, and stood, now a few paces
distant, on all four legs, not much smaller than a young elephant, swaying a long bushy tail. It was the
first thing in Perelandra which seemed to show any fear of man. Yet it was not fear. When he called to
it, it came nearer. It puts its velvet nose into his hand and endured his touch, but almost at once it darted
back and, bending its long neck, buried its head in its paws. He could make no headway with it, and
when at length it retreated out of sight he did not follow it. To do so would have seemed an injury to its
fawn-like shyness, to the yielding softness of its expression, its evident wish to be for ever a sound and
only a sound in the thickest centre of untravelled woods. He resumed his journey: a few seconds later the
song broke out behind him, louder and lovelier than before, as if in a paean of rejoicing at its recovered
privacy.
Ransom now addressed himself seriously to the ascent of the great mountain and in a few minutes
emerged from the woods on to its lower slopes. He continued ascending so steeply that he used hands as
well as feet for about half an hour and was puzzled to find himself doing it with almost no fatigue. Then
he came once more into a region of ripple trees. This time the wind was blowing the streamers not down
the mountainside but up it, so that his course had to the eye the astonishing appearance of lying through
a wide blue waterfall which flowed the wrong way, curving and foaming towards the heights.
Whenever the wind failed for a second or two the extreme ends of the streamers began to curl back
under the influence of gravitation, so that it looked as if the heads of the waves were being flung back by
a high wind. He continued going up through this for a long time, never feeling any real need for rest but
resting occasionally none the less. He was now so high that the crystal cliffs from which he had set out
appeared on a level with him as he looked back across the valley. He now saw that the land leaped up
beyond them into a whole waste of the same translucent formation which ended in a kind of glassy
tableland. Under the naked sun of our own planet this would have been too bright to look at: here, it was
a tremulous dazzle changing every moment under the undulations which the Perelandrian sky receives
from the ocean. To the left of this tableland were some peaks of greenish rock. He went on. Little by
little the peaks and the tableland sank and grew smaller, and presently there arose beyond them an
exquisite haze like vaporised amethyst and emerald and gold, and the edge of this haze rose as he rose,
and became at last the horizon of the sea, high lifted above the hills. And the sea grew ever larger and
the mountains less, and the horizon of the sea rose till at the lower mountains behind him seemed to be
lying at the bottom of a great bowl of sea; but ahead, the interminable slope, now blue, now violet, now
nickering with the smoke-like upward movement of the ripple-trees, soared up and up to the sky. And
now the wooded valley in which he had met the singing beast was invisible and the mountain from
which he had set out looked no more than a little swell on the slope of the great mountain, and there was
not a bird in the air, nor any creature underneath the streamers, and still he went on unwearied, but
always bleeding a little from his heel. He was not lonely nor afraid. He had no desires and did not even
think about reaching the top nor why he should reach it. To be always climbing this was not, in his
present mood, a process but a state, and in that state of life he was content. It did once cross his mind
that he had died and felt no weariness because he had no body. The wound in his heel convinced him
that this was not so; but if it had been so indeed, and these had been trans-mortal mountains, his journey
could hardly have been more great and strange.
That night he lay on the slopes between the stems of the ripple trees with the sweet-scented, wind-proof,
delicately-whispering roof above his head, and when morning came he resumed his journey. At first he
climbed through dense mists. When these parted, he found himself so high that the concave of the sea
seemed to dose him in on every side but one: and on that one he saw the rose-red peaks, no longer very
distant, and a pass between the two nearest ones through which he caught a glimpse of something soft
and flushed. And now he began to feel a strange mixture of sensations-a sense of perfect duty to enter
that secret place which the peaks were guarding combined with an equal sense of trespass. He dared not
go up that pass: he dared not do otherwise. He looked to see an angel with a flaming sword: he knew
that Maleldil bade him go on. 'This is the holiest and the most unholy thing I have ever done,' he
thought; but he went on. And now he was right in the pass. The peaks on either hand were not of red
rock. Cores of rock they must have had; but what he saw were great matterhorns clothed in flowers-a
flower shaped something like a lily but tinted like a rose. And soon the ground on which he trod was
carpeted with the same flowers and he must crush them as he walked; and here at last his bleeding left
no visible trace.
From the neck between the two peaks he looked a little down, for the top of the mountain was a shallow
cup. He saw a valley, a few acres in size, as secret as a valley in the top of a cloud: a valley pure rosered,
with ten or twelve of the glowing peaks about it, and in the centre a pool, married in pure un-rippled
clearness to the gold of the sky. The lilies came down to its very edge and lined all its bays and
headlands. Yielding without resistance to the awe which was gaining upon him, he walked forward with
slow paces and bowed head. There was something white near the water's edge. An altar? A patch of
white lilies among the red? A tomb? But whose tomb? No, it was not a tomb but a coffin, open and
empty, and its lid lying beside it.
Then of course he understood. This thing was own brother to the coffin-like chariot in which the
strength of angels had brought him from Earth to Venus. It was prepared for his return. If he had said, 'It
is for my burial,' his feelings would not have been very different. And while he thought of this he
became gradually aware that there was something odd about the flowers at two places in his immediate
neighbourhood. Next, he perceived that the oddity was an oddity in the light; thirdly, that it was in the
air as well as on the ground. Then, as the blood pricked his veins and a familiar, yet strange, sense of
diminished being possessed him, he knew that he was in the presence of two eldila. He stood still. It was
not for him to speak.
A CLEAR voice like a chime of remote bells, a voice with no blood in it, spoke out of the air and sent a
tingling through his frame.
"They have already set foot on the sand and are beginning to ascend," it said.
"The small one from Thulcandra is already here," said a second voice.
"Look on him, beloved, and love him," said the first. "He is indeed but breathing dust and a careless
touch would unmake him. And in his best thoughts there are such things mingled as, if we thought them,
our light would perish. But he is in the body of Maleldil and his sins are forgiven. His very name in his
own tongue is Elwin, the friend of the eldila."
"How great is your knowledge!" said the second voice. "I have been down into the air of Thulcandra,"
said the first, "which the small ones call Tellus. A thickened air as full of the Darkened as Deep Heaven
is of the Light Ones. I have heard the prisoners there talking in their divided tongues and Elwin has
taught me how it is with them."
From these words Ransom knew the speaker was the Oyarsa of Malacandra, the great archon of Mars.
He did not, of course, recognise the voice, for there is no difference between one eldil's voice and
another's. It is by art, not nature, that they affect human ear-drums and their words owe nothing to lungs
or lips.
"If it is good, Oyarsa," said Ransom, "tell me who is this other."
"It is Oyarsa," said Oyarsa, "and here that is not my name. In my own sphere I am Oyarsa. Here I am
only Malacandra." "I am Perelandra," said the other voice. "I do not understand," said Ransom. "The
Woman told me there were no eldila in this world."
"They have not seen my face till today," said the second voice, "except as they see it in the water and the
roof heaven, the islands, the caves, and the trees. I was not set to rule them, but while they were young I
ruled all else. I rounded this ball when it first arose from Arbol. I spun the air about it and wove the roof.
I built the Fixed Island and this, the holy mountain, as Maleldil taught me. The beasts that sing and the
beasts that fly and all that swims on my breast and all that creeps and tunnels within me down to the
centre has been mine. And today all this is taken from me. Blessed be He."
"The small one will not understand you," said the Lord of Malacandra. "He will think that this is a
grievous thing in your eyes."
"He does not say this, Malacandra."
"No. That is another strange thing about the children of Adam."
There was a moment's silence and then Malacandra addressed Ransom. "You will think of this best if
you think' of it in the likeness of certain things from your own world."
"I think I understand," said Ransom, "for one of Maleldil's sayers has told us. It is like when the children
of a great house come to their full age. Then those who administered all their riches, and whom perhaps
they have never seen, come and put all in their hands and give up their keys."
"You understand well," said Perelandra. "Or like when the singing beast leaves the dumb dam who
suckled him."
"The singing beast?" said Ransom. "I would gladly hear more of this."
"The beasts of that kind have no milk and always what they bring forth is suckled by the she-beast of
another kind. She is great and beautiful and dumb, and till the young singing beast is weaned it is among
her whelps and is subject to her. But when it is grown it becomes the most delicate and glorious of all
beasts and goes from her. And she wonders at its song."
"Why has Maleldil made such a thing?" said Ransom.
"That is to ask why Maleldil has made me," said Perelandra. "But now it is enough to say that from the
habits of these two beasts much wisdom will come into the minds of my King and my Queen and their
children. But the hour is upon us, and this is enough."
"What hour?" asked Ransom.
"Today is the morning day," said one or other or both the voices. But there was something much more
than sound about Ransom and his heart began beating fast.
"The morning ... do you mean . . .?" he asked. "Is all well? Has the Queen found the King?"
"The world is born today," said Malacandra. "Today for the first time two creatures of the low worlds,
two images of Maleldil that breathe and breed like the beasts, step up that step at which your parents
fell? and sit in the throne of what they were meant to be. It was never seen before. Because it did not
happen in your world a greater thing happened, but not this. Because the greater thing happened in
Thulcandra, this and not the greater thing happens here." "Elwin is falling to the ground," said the other
voice. "Be comforted," said Malacandra. "It is no doing of yours. You are not great, though you could
have prevented a thing so great that Deep Heaven sees it with amazement. Be comforted, small one, in
your smallness. He lays no merit on you. Receive and be glad. Have no fear, lest your shoulders be
bearing this world. Look! it is beneath your head and carries you." "Will they come here?" asked
Ransom some time later. "They are already well up the mountain's side," said Perelandra. "And our hour
is upon us. Let us prepare our shapes. We are hard for them to see while we remain in ourselves."
"It is very well said," answered Malacandra. "But in what form shall we show ourselves to do them
honour?"
"Let us appear to the small one here," said the other. "For he is a man and can tell us what is pleasing to
their senses." "I can see-I can see something even now," said Ransom. "Would you have the King strain
his eyes to see those who come to do him honour?" said the archon of Perelandra. "But look on this and
tell us how it deals with you."
The very faint light-the almost imperceptible alterations in the visual field-which betokens an eldil
vanished suddenly. The rosy peaks and the calm pool vanished also. A tornado of sheer monstrosities
seemed to be pouring over Ransom. Darting pillars filled with eyes, lightning pulsations of flame, talons
and beaks and billowy masses of what suggested snow, volleyed through cubes and heptagons into an
infinite black void. "Stop it... stop it," he yelled, and the scene cleared. He gazed round blinking on the
fields of lilies, and presently gave the ' eldila to understand that this kind of appearance was not suited to
human sensations. "Look then on this," said the voices again. And he looked with some reluctance, and
far on" between the peaks on the other side of the little valley there came rolling wheels. There was
nothing but that-concentric wheels moving with a rather sickening slowness one inside the other. There
was nothing terrible about them if you could get used to their appalling size, but there was also nothing
significant. He bade them to try yet a third time. And suddenly two human figures stood before him on
the opposite side of the lake.
They were taller than the Sorns, the giants whom he had met in Mars. They were perhaps thirty feet
high. They were burning white like white-hot iron. The outline of their bodies when he looked at it
steadily against the red landscape seemed to be faintly, swiftly undulating as though the permanence of
their shape, like that of waterfalls or flames, co-existed with a rushing movement of the matter it
contained. For a fraction of an inch inward from this outline the landscape was just visible through them:
beyond that they were opaque.
Whenever he looked straight at them they appeared to be rushing towards him with enormous speed:
whenever his eyes took in their surroundings he realised that they were stationary. This may have been
due in part to the fact that their long and sparkling hair stood out straight behind them as if in a great
wind. But if there were a wind it was not made of air, for no petal of the flowers was shaken. They were
not standing quite vertically in relation to the floor of the valley: but to Ransom it appeared (as it had
appeared to me on Earth when I saw one) that the eldils were vertical. It was the valley-it was the whole
world of Perelandra-which was aslant. He remembered the words of Oyarsa long ago in Mars, "I am not
here in the same way that you are here." It was borne in upon him that the creatures were really moving,
though not moving in relation to him. This planet which inevitably seemed to him while he was in it an
unmoving world-the world, in fact-was to them a thing moving through the heavens. In relation to their
own celestial frame of reference they were rushing forward to keep abreast of the mountain valley. Had
they stood still, they would have flashed past him too quickly for him to see, doubly dropped behind by
the planet's spin on its own axis and by its onward march around the Sun.
Their bodies, he said, were white. But a flush of diverse colours began at about the shoulders and
streamed up the necks and nickered over face and head and stood out around the head like plumage or a
halo. He told me he could in a sense remember these colours-that is, he would know them if he saw
them again-but that he cannot by any effort call up a visual image of them nor give them any name. The
very few people with whom he and I can discuss these matters all give the same explanation. We think
that when creatures of the hypersomatic kind choose to 'appear' to us, they are not in fact affecting our
retina at all, but directly manipulating the relevant parts of our brain. If so, it is quite possible that they
can produce there the sensations we should have if our eyes were capable of receiving those colours in
the spectrum which are actually beyond their range. The 'plumage' or halo of the one eldil was extremely
different from that of the other. The Oyarsa of Mars shone with cold and morning colours, a little
metallic-pure, hard, and bracing. The Oyarsa of Venus glowed with a warm splendour, full of the
suggestion of teeming vegetable life.
The faces surprised him very much. Nothing less like the 'angel' of popular art could well be imagined.
The rich variety, the hint of undeveloped possibilities, which make the interest of human faces, were
entirely absent. One single, changeless expression-so clear that it hurt and dazzled him- was stamped on
each and there was nothing else there at all. In that sense their faces were as 'primitive', as unnatural, if
you like, as those of archaic statues from Aegina. What this one thing was he could not be certain. He
concluded in the end that it was charity. But it was terrifyingly different from the expression of human
charity, which we always see either blossoming out of, or hastening to descend into, natural affection.
Here there was no affection at all: no least lingering memory of it even at ten million years' distance, no
germ from which it could spring in any future, however remote. Pure, spiritual, intellectual love shot
from their faces like barbed lightning. It was so unlike the love we experience that its expression could
easily be mistaken for ferocity.
Both the bodies were naked, and both were free from any sexual characteristics, either primary or
secondary. That, one would have expected. But whence came this curious difference between them? He
found that he could point to no single feature wherein the difference resided, yet it was impossible to
ignore. One could try-Ransom has tried a hundred times- to put it into words. He has said that
Malacandra was like rhythm and Perelandra like melody. He has said that Malacandra affected him like
a quantitative, Perelandra like an accentual, metre. He thinks that the first held in his hand something
like a spear, but the hands of the other were open, with the palms towards him. But I don't know that any
of these attempts has helped me much. At all events what Ransom saw at that moment was the real
meaning of gender. Everyone must sometimes have wondered why in nearly all tongues certain
inanimate objects are masculine and others feminine. What is masculine about a mountain or feminine
about certain trees? Ransom has cured me of believing that this is a purely morphological phenomenon,
depending on the form of the word. Still less is gender an imaginative extension of sex. Our ancestors
did not make mountains masculine because they projected male characteristics into them. The real
process is the reverse. Gender is a reality, and a more fundamental reality than sex. Sex is, in fact,
merely the adaptation to organic life of a fundamental polarity which divides all created beings. Female
sex is simply one of the things that have feminine gender, there are many others, and Masculine and
Feminine meet us on planes of reality where male and female would be simply meaningless. Masculine
is not attenuated male, nor feminine attenuated female. On the contrary, the male and female of organic
creatures are rather faint and blurred reflections of masculine and feminine. Their reproductive
functions, their differences in strength and size, partly exhibit, but partly also confuse and misrepresent,
the real polarity. All this Ransom saw, as it were, with his own eyes. The two white creatures were
sexless. But he of Malacandra was masculine (not male); she of Perelandra was feminine (not female).
Malacandra seemed to him to have the look of one standing armed, at the ramparts of his own remote
archaic world, in ceaseless vigilance, his eyes ever roaming the earthward horizon whence his danger
came long ago. "A sailor's look," Ransom once said to me, "you know .. . eyes that are impregnated with
distance." But the eyes of Perelandra opened, as it were, inward, as if they were the curtained gateway to
a world of waves and murmurings and wandering airs, of life that rocked in winds and splashed on
mossy stones and descended as the dew and arose sunward in thin-spun delicacy of mist. On Mars the
very forests are of stone; in Venus the lands swim. For now he thought of them no more as Malacandra
and Perelandra. He called them by their Tellurian names. With deep wonder he thought to himself, 'My
eyes have seen Mars and Venus. I have seen Ares and Aphrodite.' He asked them how they were known
to the old poets of Tellus. When and from whom had the children of Adam learned that Ares was a man
of war and that Aphrodite rose from the sea foam? Earth had been besieged, an enemy-occupied
territory, since before history began. The gods have no commerce there. How then do we know of them?
It comes, they told him, a long way round and through many stages. There is an environment of minds
as well as of space. The universe is one-a spider's web wherein each mind lives along every line, a vast
whispering gallery where (save for the direct action of Maleldil) though no news travels unchanged yet
no secret can be rigorously kept. In the mind of the fallen Archon under whom our planet groans, the
memory of Deep Heaven and the gods with whom he once consorted is still alive. Nay, in the very
matter of our world, the traces of the celestial commonwealth are not quite lost. Memory passes through
the womb and hovers in the air. The Muse is a real thing. A faint breath, as Virgil says, reaches even the
late generations. Our mythology is based on a solider reality than we dream: but it is also at an almost
infinite distance from that base. And when they told him this. Ransom at last understood why mythology
was what it was-gleams of celestial strength and beauty falling on a jungle of filth and imbecility. His
cheeks burned on behalf of our race when he looked on the true Mars and Venus and remembered the
follies that have been talked of them on Earth. Then a doubt struck him. "But do I see you as you really
are?" he asked. "Only Maleldil sees any creature as it really is," said Mars. "How do you see one
another?" asked Ransom. "There are no holding places in your mind for an answer to that." "Am I then
seeing only an appearance? Is it not real at all?" "You see only an appearance, small one. You have
never seen more than an appearance of anything-not of Arbol, nor of a stone, nor of your own body.
This appearance is as true as what you see of those." "But. . . there were those other appearances." "No.
There was only the failure of appearance." "I don't understand," said Ransom. "Were all those other
things-the wheels and the eyes-more real than this or less?"
"There is no meaning in your question," said Mars. "You can see a stone, if it is a fit distance from you
and if you and it are moving at speeds not too different. But if one throws the stone at your eye, what
then is the appearance?" "I should feel pain and perhaps see splintered light," said Ransom. "But I don't
know that I should call that an appearance of the stone."
"Yet it would be the true operation of the stone. And there is your question answered. We are now at the
right distance from you."
"And were you nearer in what I first saw?"
"I do not mean that kind of distance."
"And then," said Ransom, still pondering, "there is what I had thought was your wonted appearance-the
very faint light, Oyarsa, as I used to see it in your own world. What of that?"
"That is enough appearance for us to speak to you by. No more was needed between us: no more is
needed now. It is to honour the King that we would now appear more. That light is the overflow or echo
into the world of your senses of vehicles made for appearance to one another and to the greater eldila."
At this moment Ransom suddenly noticed an increasing disturbance of sound behind his back-of
uncoordinated sound, husky and pattering noises which broke in on the mountain silence and the crystal
voices of the gods with a delicious note of warm animality, He glanced round. Romping, prancing,
fluttering, gliding, crawling, waddling, with every kind of movement-in every kind of shape and colour
and size-a whole zoo of beasts and birds was pouring into a flowery valley through the passes between
the peaks at his back. They came mostly in their pairs, male and female together, fawning upon one
another, climbing over one another, diving under one another's bellies, perching upon one another's
backs. Flaming plumage, gilded beaks, glossy flanks, liquid eyes, great red caverns of whinnying or of
bleating mouths, and thickets of switching tails, surrounded him on every side. 'A regular Noah's Ark!'
thought Ransom, and then, with sudden seriousness: 'But there will be no ark needed in this world.'
The song of four singing beasts rose in almost deafening triumph above the restless multitude. The great
eldil of Perelandra kept back the creatures to the hither side of the pool, leaving the opposite side of the
valley empty except for the coffin-like object. Ransom was not clear whether Venus spoke to the beasts
or even whether they were conscious of her presence. Her connection with them was perhaps of some
subtler kind-quite different from the relations he had observed between them and the Green Lady. Both
the eldila were now on the same side of the pool with Ransom. He and they and all the beasts were
facing in the same direction. The thing began to arrange itself. First, on the very brink of the pool, were
the eldila, standing: between them, and a little back, was Ransom, still sitting among the lilies. Behind
him the four singing beasts, sitting up on their haunches like fire-dogs, and proclaiming joy to all ears.
Behind these again, the other animals. The sense of ceremony deepened. The expectation became
intense. In our foolish human fashion he asked a question merely for the purpose of breaking it. "How
can they climb to here and go down again and yet be off this island before nightfall?" Nobody answered
him. He did not need an answer, for somehow he knew perfectly well that this island had never been
forbidden them, and that one purpose in forbidding the other had been to lead them to this their destined
throne. Instead of answering, the gods said, "Be still."
Ransom's eyes had grown so used to the tinted softness of Perelandrian daylight-and specially since his
journey in the dark guts of the mountain-that he had quite ceased to notice its difference from the
daylight of our own world. It was, therefore, with a shock of double amazement that he now suddenly
saw the peaks on the far side of the valley showing really dark against what seemed a terrestrial dawn. A
moment later sharp, well-defined shadows-long, like the shadows at early morning-were streaming back
from every beast and every un-evenness of the ground and each lily had its light and its dark side. Up
and up came the light from the mountain slope. It filled the whole valley. The shadows disappeared
again. All was in a pure daylight that seemed to come from nowhere in particular. He knew ever
afterwards what is meant by a light 'resting on' or 'overshadowing' a holy thing, but not emanating from
it. For as the light reached its perfection and settled itself, as it were, like a lord upon his throne or like
wine in a bowl, and filled the whole flowery cup of the mountain top, every cranny, with its purity, the
holy thing. Paradise itself in its two Persons, Paradise walking hand in hand, its two bodies shining in
the light like emeralds yet not themselves too bright to look at, came in sight in the cleft between two
peaks, and stood a moment with its male right hand lifted in regal and pontifical benediction, and then
walked down and stood on the far side of the water. And the gods kneeled and bowed their huge bodies
before the small forms of that young King and Queen.
THERE was great silence on the mountain top and Ransom also had fallen down before the human pair.
When at last he raised his eyes from the four blessed feet, he found himself involuntarily speaking
though his voice was broken and his eyes dimmed. "Do not move away, do not raise me up," he said. "I
have never before seen a man or a woman. I have lived all my life among shadows and broken images.
Oh, my Father and my Mother, my Lord and my Lady, do not move, do not answer me yet. My own
father and mother I have never seen. Take me for your son. We have been alone in my world for a great
time."
The eyes of the Queen looked upon him with love and recognition, but it was not of the Queen that he
thought most. It was hard to think of anything but the King. And how shall I- I who have not seen himtell
you what he was like? It was hard even for Ransom to tell me of the King's face. But we dare not
withhold the truth. It was that face which no man can say he does not know. You might ask how it was
possible to look upon it and not to commit idolatry, not to mistake it for that of which it was the likeness.
For the resemblance was, in its own fashion, infinite, so that almost you could wonder at finding no
sorrows in his brow and no wounds in his hands and feet. Yet there was no danger of mistaking, not one
moment of confusion, no least sally of the will towards forbidden reverence. Where likeness was
greatest, mistake was least possible. Perhaps this is always so. A clever waxwork can be made so like a
man that for a moment it deceives us: the great portrait which is far more deeply like him does not.
Plaster images of the Holy One may before now have drawn to themselves the adoration they were
meant to arouse for the reality. But here, where His live image, like Him within and without, made by
His own bare hands out of the depth of divine artistry. His masterpiece of self-portraiture coming forth
from His workshop to delight all worlds, walked and spoke before Ransom's eyes, it could never be
taken for more than an image. Nay, the very beauty of it lay in the certainty that it was a copy, like and
not the same, an echo, a rhyme, an exquisite reverberation of the uncreated music prolonged in a created
medium. Ransom was lost for a while in the wonder of these things, so that when he came to himself he
found that Perelandra was speaking, and what he heard seemed to be the end of a long oration. "The
floating lands and the firm lands," she was saying, "the air and the curtains at the gates of Deep Heaven,
the seas and the Holy Mountain, the rivers above and the rivers of under-land, the fire, the fish, the birds,
the beasts, and the others of the waves whom yet you know not; all these Maleldil puts into your hand
from this day forth as far as you live in time and farther. My word henceforth is nothing: your word is
law unchangeable and the very daughter of the Voice. In all that circle which this world runs about
Arbol, you are Oyarsa. Enjoy it well. Give names to all creatures, guide all natures to perfection.
Strengthen the feebler, lighten the darker, love all. Hail and be glad, oh man and woman, OyarsaPerelendra,
the Adam, the Crown, Tor and Tinidril, Baru and Baru'ah, Ask and Embia, Yatsur and
Yatsurah, dear to Maleldil. Blessed be He!"
When the King spoke in answer. Ransom looked up at him again. He saw that the human pair were now
seated on a low bank that rose near the margin of the pool. So great was the light, that they cast clear
reflections in the water as they might have done in our own world.
"We give you thanks, fair foster mother," said the King, "and specially for this world in which you have
laboured for long ages as Maleldil's very hand that all might be ready for us when we woke. We have
not known you till today. We have often wondered whose hand it was that we saw in the long waves and
the bright islands and whose breath delighted us in the wind at morning. For though we were young
then, we saw dimly that to say 'It is Maleldil' was true, but not all the truth. This world we receive: our
joy is the greater because we take it by your gift as well as by His. But what does He put into your mind
to do henceforward?"
"It lies in your bidding, Tor-Oyarsa," said Perelandra, "whether I now converse in Deep Heaven only or
also in that part of Deep Heaven which is to you a World."
"It is very much our will," said the King, "that you remain with us, both for the love we bear you and
also that you may strengthen us with counsel and even with your operations. Not till we have gone many
times about Arbol shall we grow up to the full management of the dominion which Maleldil puts into
our hands: nor are we yet ripe to steer the world through Heaven nor to make rain and fair weather upon
us. If it seems good to you, remain."
"I am content," said Perelandra. While this dialogue proceeded, it was a wonder that the contrast
between the Adam and the eldils was not a discord. On the one side, the crystal, bloodless voice, and the
immutable expression of the snow-white face; on the other the blood coursing in the veins, the feeling
trembling on the lips and sparkling in the eyes, the might of the man's shoulders, the wonder of the
woman's breasts, a splendour of virility and richness of womanhood unknown on Earth, a living torrent
of perfect animality-yet when these met, the one did not seem rank nor the other spectral. Animal
rationale-an animal, yet also a reasonable soul: such, he remembered, was the old definition of Man. But
he had never till now seen the reality. For now he saw this living Paradise, the Lord and Lady, as the
resolution of discords, the bridge that spans what would else be a chasm in creation, the keystone of the
whole arch. By entering that mountain valley they had suddenly united the warm multitude of the brutes
behind him with the transcorporeal intelligence at his side. They closed the circle, and with their coming
all the separate notes of strength or beauty which that assembly had hitherto struck became one music.
But now the King was speaking again.
"And as it is not Maleldil's gift simply," he said, "but-also Maleldil's gift through you, and thereby the
richer, so it is not through you only, but through a third, and thereby the richer again. And this is the first
word I speak as Tor-Oyarsa-Perelendri; that in our world, as long as it is a world, neither shall morning
come nor night but that we and all our children shall speak to Maleldil of Ransom the man of
Thulcandra and praise him to one another. And to you. Ransom, I say this, that you have called us Lord
and Father, Lady and Mother. And rightly, for this is our name. But in another fashion we call you Lord
and Father. For it seems to us that Maleldil sent you into our world at that day when the time of our
being young drew to its end, and from it we must now go up or go down, into corruption or into
perfection. Maleldil had taken us where He meant us to be: but of Maleldil's instruments in this, you
were the chief."
They made him go across the water to them, wading, for it came only to his knees. He would have fallen
at their feet but they would not let him. They rose to meet him and both kissed him, mouth to mouth and
heart to heart as equals embrace. They would have made him sit between them, but when they saw that
this troubled him they let it be. He went and sat down on the level ground, below them, and a little to the
left. From there he faced the assembly-the huge shapes of the gods and the concourse of beasts. And
then the Queen spoke.
"As soon as you had taken away the Evil One," she said, "and I awoke from sleep, my mind was cleared.
It is a wonder to me. Piebald, that for all those days you and I could have been so young. The reason for
not yet living on the Fixed Land is now so plain. How could I wish to live there except because it was
Fixed? And why should I desire the Fixed except to make sure-to be able on one day to command where
I should be the next and what should happen to me? It was to reject the wave-to draw my hands out of
Maleldil's, to say to Him, 'Not thus, but thus'-to put in our own power what times should roll towards
us ... as if you gathered fruits together today for tomorrow's eating instead of taking what came. That
would have been cold love and feeble trust. And out of it how could we ever have climbed back into
love and trust again?"
"I see it well," said Ransom. "Though in my world it would pass for folly. We have been evil so long"-
and then he stopped, doubtful of being understood and surprised that he'd used a word for evil which he
had not hitherto known that he knew, and which he had not heard either in Mars or in Venus.
"We know these things now," said the King, seeing Ransom's hesitation. "All this, all that happened in
your world, Maleldil has put into our mind. We have learned of evil, though not as the Evil One wished
us to learn. We have learned better than that, and know it more, for it is waking that understands sleep
and not sleep that understands waking. There is an ignorance of evil that comes from being young:
there is a darker ignorance that comes from doing it, as men by sleeping lose the knowledge of sleep.
You are more ignorant of evil in Thulcandra now than in the days before your Lord and Lady began to
do it. But Maleldil has brought us out of the one ignorance, and we have not entered the other. It was by
the Evil One himself that he brought us out of the first. Little did that dark mind know the errand on
which he really came to Perelandra!"
"Forgive me, my Father, if I speak foolishly," said Ransom. "I see how evil has been made known to the
Queen, but not how it was made known to you."
Then unexpectedly the King laughed. His body was very big and his laugh was like an earthquake in it,
loud and deep and long, till in the end Ransom laughed too, though he had not seen the joke, and the
Queen laughed as well. And the birds began clapping their wings and the beasts wagging their tails, and
the light seemed brighter and the pulse of the whole assembly quickened, and new modes of joy that had
nothing to do with mirth as we understand it passed into them all, as it were from the very air, or as if
there were dancing in Deep Heaven. Some say there always is.
"I know what he is thinking," said the King, looking upon the Queen. "He is thinking that you suffered
and strove and I have a world for my reward." Then he turned to Ransom and continued. "You are
right," he said, "I know now what they say in your world about justice. And perhaps they say well, for in
that world things always fall below justice. But Maleldil always goes above it. All is gift. I am Oyarsa
not by His gift alone but by our foster mother's, not by hers alone but by yours, not by yours alone but
my wife's-nay, in some sort, by gift of the very beasts and birds. Through many hands, enriched with
many different kinds of love and labour, the gift comes to me. It is the Law. The best fruits are plucked
for each by some hand that is not his own."
"That is not the whole of what happened. Piebald," said the Queen. "The King has not told you all.
Maleldil drove him far away into a green sea where forests grow up from the bottom through the
waves. . . ."
"Its name is Lur," said the King.
"Its name is Lur," repeated the eldila. And Ransom realised that the King had uttered not an observation
but an enactment.
"And there in Lur (it is far hence)," said the Queen, "strange things befell him."
"Is it good to ask about these things?" said Ransom.
"There were many things," said Tor the King. "For many hours I learned the properties of shapes by
drawing lines in the turf of a little island on which I rode. For many hours learned new things about
Maleldil and about His Father and the Third One. We knew little of this while we were young. But after
that He showed me in a darkness what was happening to the Queen. And I knew it was possible for her
to be undone. And then I saw what had happened in your world, and how your Mother fell and how your
Father went with her, doing her no good thereby and bringing the darkness upon all their children. And
then it was before me like a thing coming towards my hand . . . what I should do in like case. There I
learned of evil and good, of anguish and joy."
Ransom had expected the King to relate his decision, but when the King's voice died away into
thoughtful silence he had not the assurance to question him.
"Yes . . ." said the King, musing. "Though a man were to be torn in two halves . . . though half of him
turned into earth. . . . The living half must still follow Maleldil. For if it also lay down and became earth,
what hope would there be for the whole? But while one half lived, through it He might send life back
into the other." Here he paused for a long time, and then spoke again somewhat quickly. "He gave me no
assurance. No fixed land. Always one must throw oneself into the wave." Then he cleared his brow and
turned to the eldila and spoke in a new voice.
"Certainly, oh foster mother," he said. "We have much need of counsel for already we feel that growing
up within our bodies which our young wisdom can hardly overtake. They will not always be bodies
bound to the low worlds. Hear the second word that I speak as Tor-Oyarsa-Perelendri. While this World
goes about Arbol ten thousand times, we shall judge and hearten our people from this throne. Its name is
Tai Harendrunar, The Hill of Life."
"Its name is Tai Harendrimar," said the eldila. "On the Fixed Land which once was forbidden," said Tor
the King, "we will make a great place to the splendour of Maleldil. Our sons shall bend the pillars of
rock' into arches--"
"What are arches?" said Tinidril the Queen. "Arches," said Tor the King, "are when pillars of stone
throw out branches like trees and knit their branches together and bear up a great dome as of leafage, but
the leaves shall be shaped stones. And there our sons will make images." "What are images?" said
Tinidril. "Splendour of Deep Heaven!" cried the King with a great laugh. "It seems there are too many
new words in the air. I had thought these things were coming out of your mind into mine, and lo! you
have not thought them at all. Yet I think Maleldil passed them to me through you, none the less. I will
show you images, I will show you houses. It may be that in this matter our natures are reversed and it is
you who beget and I who beget and I who bear. But let us speak of plainer matters. We will fill this
world with our children. We will know this world to the centre. We will make the nobler of the beasts so
wise that they will become hnau and speak: their lives shall awake to a new life in us as we awake in
Maleldil. When the time is ripe for it and the ten thousand circlings are nearly at an end, we will tear the
sky curtain and Deep Heaven shall become familiar to the eyes of our sons as the trees and the waves to
ours."
"And what after this, Tor-Oyarsa?" said Malacandra. "Then it is Maleldil's purpose to make us free of
Deep Heaven. Our bodies will be changed, but not all changed. We shall be as the eldila, but not all as
the eldila. And so will all our sons and daughters be changed in the time of their ripeness, until the
number is made up which Maleldil read in His Father's mind before times flowed."
"And that," said Ransom, "will be the end?" Tor the King stared at him. "The end?" he said. "Who spoke
of an end?" "The end of your world, I mean," said Ransom. "Splendour of Heaven!" said Tor. "Your
thoughts are unlike ours. About that time we shall be not far from the beginning of all things. But there
will be one matter to settle before the beginning rightly begins." "What is that?" asked Ransom.
"Your own world," said Tor, "Thulcandra. The siege of your world shall be raised, the black spot cleared
away, before the real beginning. In those days Maleldil will go to war-in us, and in many who once were
hnau on your world, and in many from far off and in many eldila, and, last of all, in Himself unveiled,
He will go down to Thulcandra. Some of us will go before. It is in my mind, Malacandra, that thou and I
will be among those. We shall fall upon your moon, wherein there is a secret evil, and which is as the
shield of the Dark Lord of Thulcandra-scarred with many a blow. We shall break her. Her light shall be
put out. Her fragments shall fall into your world and the seas and the smoke shall arise so that the
dwellers in Thulcandra will no longer see the light of Arbol. And as Maleldil Himself draws near, the
evil things in your world shall show themselves stripped of disguise so that plagues and horrors shall
cover your lands and seas. But in the end all shall be cleansed, and even the memory of your Black
Oyarsa blotted out, and your world shall be fair and sweet and reunited to the field of Arbol and its true
name shall be heard again. But can it be Friend, that no rumour of all this is heard in Thulcandra? Do
your people think that their Dark Lord will hold his prey for ever?"
"Most of them," said Ransom, "have ceased to think of such things at all. Some of us still have the
knowledge: but I did not at once see what you were talking of, because what you call the beginning we
are accustomed to call the Last Things."
"I do not call it the beginning," said Tor the King. "It is but the wiping out of a false start in order that
the world may then begin. As when a man lies down to sleep, if he finds a twisted root under his
shoulder he will change his place-and after that his real sleep begins. Or as a man setting foot on an
island, may make a false step. He steadies himself and after that his journey begins. You would not call
that steadying of himself a last thing?"
"And is the whole story of my race no more than this?" said Ransom.
"I see no more than beginnings in the history of the Low Worlds," said Tor the King. "And in yours a
failure to begin. You talk of evenings before the day had dawned. I set forth even now on ten thousand
years of preparation-I, the first of my race, my race the first of races, to begin. I tell you that when the
last of my children has ripened and ripeness has spread from them to all the Low Worlds, it will be
whispered that the morning is at hand."
"I am full of doubts and ignorance," said Ransom. "In our world those who know Maleldil at all believe
that His coming down to us and being a man is the central happening of all that happens. If you take that
from me. Father, whither will you lead me? Surely not to the enemy's talk which thrusts my world and
my race into a remote comer and gives me a universe with no centre at all, but millions of worlds that
lead nowhere or (what is worse) to more and more worlds for ever, and comes over me with numbers
and empty spaces and repetitions and asks me to bow down before bigness. Or do you make your world
the centre? But I am troubled. What of the people of Malacandra? Would they also think that their world
was the centre? I do not even see how your world can rightly be called yours. You were made yesterday
and it is from old. The most of it is water where you cannot live. And what of the things beneath its
crust? And of the great spaces with no world at all? Is the enemy easily answered when He says that all
is without plan or meaning? As soon as we think we see one it melts away into nothing, or into some
other plan that we never dreamed of, and what was the centre becomes the rim, till we doubt if any
shape or plan or pattern was ever more than a trick of our own eyes, cheated with hope, or tired with too
much looking. To what is all driving? What is the morning you speak of? What is it the beginning of?"
"The beginning of the Great Game, of the Great Dance," said Tor. "I know little of it as yet. Let the
eldila speak."
The voice that spoke next seemed to be that of Mars, but Ransom was not certain. And who spoke after
that, he does not know at all. For in the conversation that followed-if it can be called a conversationthough
he believes that he himself was sometimes the speaker, he never knew which words were his or
another's, or even whether a man or an eldil was talking. The speeches followed one another-if, indeed,
they did not all take place at the same time-like the parts of a music into which all five of them had
entered as instruments or like a wind blowing through five trees that stand together on a hilltop.
"We would not talk of it like that," said the first voice. "The Great Dance does not wait to be perfect
until the peoples of the Low Worlds are gathered into it. We speak not of when it will begin. It has
begun from before always. There was no time when we did not rejoice before His face as now. The
dance which we dance is at the centre and for the dance all things were made. Blessed be He!"
Another said, "Never did He make two things the same;
never did He utter one word twice. After earths, not better earths but beasts; after beasts, not better
beasts but spirits. After a falling, not recovery but a new creation. Out of the new creation, not a third
but the mode of change itself is changed for ever. Blessed be He!"
And another said, "It is loaded with justice as a tree bows down with fruit. All is righteousness and there
is no equality. Not as when stones lie side by side, but as when stones support and are supported in an
arch, such is His order; rule and obedience, begetting and bearing, heat glancing down, life growing up.
Blessed be He!"
One said, "They who add years to years in lumpish aggregation, or miles to miles and galaxies to
galaxies, shall not come near His greatness. The day of the fields of Arbol will fade and the days of
Deep Heaven itself are numbered. Not thus is He great. He dwells (all of Him dwells) within the seed of
the smallest flower and is not cramped: Deep Heaven is inside Him who is inside the seed and does not
distend Him. Blessed be He!"
"The edge of each nature borders on that whereof it contains no shadow or similitude. Of many points
one line; of many lines one shape; of many shapes one solid body; of many senses and thoughts one
person; of three persons. Himself. As in the circle to the sphere, so are the ancient worlds that needed no
redemption to that world wherein He was born and died. As is a point to a line, so is that world to the faroff
fruits of its redeeming. Blessed be He!"
"Yet the circle is not less round than the sphere, and the sphere is the home and fatherland of circles.
Infinite multitudes of circles lie enclosed in every sphere, and if they spoke they would say. For us were
spheres created. Let no mouth open to gainsay them. Blessed be He!"
"The peoples of the ancient worlds who never sinned, for whom He never came down, are the peoples
for whose sake the Low Worlds were made. For though the healing what was wounded and the
straightening what was bent is a new dimension of glory, yet the straight was not made that it might be
bent nor the whole that it might be wounded. The ancient peoples are at the centre. Blessed be He!"
"All which is not itself the Great Dance was made in order that He might, come down into it. In the
Fallen World He prepared for Himself a body and was united with the Dust and made it glorious for
ever. This is the end and final cause of all creating, and the sin whereby it came is called Fortunate and
the world where this was enacted is the centre of worlds. Blessed be He!"
"The Tree was planted in that world but the fruit has ripened in this. The fountain that sprang with
mingled blood and life in the Dark World, flows here with life only. We have passed the first cataracts,
and from here onward the stream flows deep and turns in the direction of the sea. This is the Morning
Star which He promised to those who conquer; this is the centre of worlds. Till now, all has waited. But
now the trumpet has sounded and the army is on the move. Blessed be He!"
"Though men or angels rule them, the worlds are for themselves. The waters you have not floated on,
the fruit you have not plucked, the caves into which you have not descended and the fire through which
your bodies cannot pass, do not await your coming to put on perfection, though they will obey you when
you come. Times without number I have circled Arbol while you were not alive, and those times were
not desert. Their own voice was in them, not merely a dreaming of the day when you should awake.
They also were at the centre. Be comforted, small immortals. You are not the voice that all things utter,
nor is there eternal silence in the places where you cannot come. No feet have walked, nor shall, on the
ice of Glund;
no eye looked up from beneath on the Ring of Lurga, and Iron-plain in Neruval is chaste and empty. Yet
it is not for nothing that the gods walked ceaselessly around the fields of Arbol. Blessed be He!"
' 'That Dust itself which is scattered so rare in Heaven, whereof all worlds, and the bodies that are not
worlds, are made, is at the centre. It waits not till created eyes have seen it or hands handled it, to be in
itself a strength and splendour of Maleldil. Only the least part has served, or ever shall, a beast, a man, or
a god. But always, and beyond all distances, before they came and after they are gone and where they
never come, it is what it is and utters the heart of the Holy One with its own voice. It is farthest from
Him of all things, for it has no life, nor sense, nor reason; it is nearest to Him of all things for without
intervening soul, as sparks fly out of fire. He utters in each grain of it the unmixed image of His energy.
Each grain, if it spoke, would say, I am at the centre; for me all things were made. Let no mouth open to
gainsay it. Blessed be He!"
"Each grain is at the centre. The Dust is at the centre. The Worlds are at the centre. The beasts are at the
centre. The ancient peoples are there. The race that sinned is there. Tor and Tinidril are there. The gods
are there also. Blessed be He!" "Where Maleldil is, there is the centre. He is in every place. Not some of
Him in one place and some in another, but in each place the whole Maleldil, even in the smallness
beyond thought. There is no way out of the centre save into the Bent Will which casts itself into the
Nowhere. Blessed be He!"
"Each thing was made for Him. He is the centre. Because we arc with Him, each of us is at the centre. It
is not as in a city of the Darkened World where they say that each must live for all. In His city all things
are made for each. When He died in the Wounded World He died not for me, but for each man. If each
man had been the only man made, he would have done no less. Each thing, from the single grain of Dust
to the strongest eldil, is the end and the final cause of all creation and the mirror in which the beam of
His brightness comes to rest and so returns to Him. Blessed be He!"
"In the plan of the Great Dance plans without number interlock, and each movement becomes in its
season the breaking into flower of the whole design to which all else had been directed. Thus each is
equally at the centre and none are there by being equals, but some by giving place and some by
receiving it, the small things by their smallness and the great by their greatness, and all the patterns
linked and looped together by the unions of a kneeling with a sceptred love. Blessed be He!"
"He has immeasurable use for each thing that is made, that His love and splendour may flow forth like a
strong river which has need of a great watercourse and fills alike the deep pools and the little crannies,
that are filled equally and remain unequal; and when it has filled them brim full it flows over and makes
new channels. We also have need beyond measure of all that He has made. Love me, my brothers, for I
am infinitely necessary to you and for your delight I was made. Blessed be He!"
"He has no need at all of anything that is made. An eldil is not more needful to Him than a grain of the
Dust: a peopled world no more needful than a world that is empty: but all needless alike, and what all
add to Him is nothing. We also have no need of anything that is made. Love me, my brothers, for I am
infinitely superfluous, and your love shall be like His, born neither of your need nor of my deserving,
but a plain bounty. Blessed be He!"
"All things are by Him and for Him. He utters Himself also for His own delight and sees that He is good.
He is His own begotten and what proceeds from Him is Himself. Blessed be He!"
"All that is made seems planless to the darkened mind, because there are more plans than it looked for.
In these seas there are islands where the hairs of the turf are so fine and so closely woven together that
unless a man looked long at them he would see neither hairs not weaving at all, but only the same and
the flat. So with the Great Dance. Set your eyes on one movement and it will lead you through all
patterns and it will seem to you the master movement. But the seeming will be true. Let no mouth open
to gainsay it. There seems no plan because it is all plan: there seems no centre because it is all centre.
Blessed be He!"
"Yet this seeming also is the end and final cause for which He spreads out Time so long and Heaven so
deep; lest if we never met the dark, and the road that leads no-whither, and the question to which no
answer is imaginable, we should have in our minds no likeness of the Abyss of the Father, into which if
a creature drop down his thoughts for ever he shall hear no echo return to him. Blessed, blessed, blessed
be He!"
And now, by a transition which he did not notice, it seemed that what had begun as speech was turned
into sight, or into something that can be remembered only as if it were seeing. He thought he saw the
Great Dance. It seemed to be woven out of the intertwining undulation of many cords or bands of light,
leaping over and under one another and mutually embraced in arabesques and flower-like subtleties.
Each figure as he looked at it became the master-figure or focus of the whole spectacle, by means of
which his eye disentangled all else and brought it • into unity-only to be itself entangled when he looked
to what he had taken for mere marginal decorations and found that there also the same hegemony was
claimed, and the claim made good, yet the former pattern not thereby dispossessed but finding in its new
subordination a significance greater than that which it had abdicated. He could see also (but the word
'seeing' is now plainly inadequate) wherever the ribbons or serpents of light intersected, minute
corpuscles of momentary brightness: and he knew somehow that these particles were the secular
generalities of which history tells-peoples, institutions, climates of opinion, civilisations, arts, sciences,
and the like- ephemeral coruscations that piped their short song and vanished. The ribbons or cords
themselves, in which millions of corpuscles lived and died, were things of some different kind. At first
he could not say what. But he knew in the end that most of them were individual entities. If so, the time
in which the Great Dance proceeds is very unlike time as we know it. Some of the thinner and more
delicate cords were beings that we call shortlived: flowers and insects, a fruit or a storm of rain, and
once (he thought) a wave of the sea. Others were such things as we also think lasting: crystals, rivers,
mountains, or even stars. Far above these in girth and luminosity and flashing with colours from beyond
our spectrum were the lines of the personal beings, and yet as different from one another in splendour as
all of them from all the previous class. But not all the cords were individuals; some were universal truths
or universal qualities. It did not surprise him then to find that these and the persons were both cords and
both stood together against the mere atoms of generality which lived and died in the clashing of their
streams: but afterwards, when he came back to earth, he wondered. And by now the thing must have
passed altogether out of the region of sight as we understand it. For he says that the whole solid figure of
these enamoured and inter-inanimated circlings was suddenly revealed as the mere superficies of a far
vaster pattern in four dimensions, and that figure as the boundary of yet others in other worlds: till
suddenly as the movement grew yet swifter, the interweaving yet more ecstatic, the relevance of all to all
yet more intense, as dimension was added to dimension and that part of him which could reason and
remember was dropped farther and farther behind that part of him which saw, even then, at the very
zenith of complexity, complexity was eaten up and faded, as a thin white cloud fades into the hard blue
burning of the sky, and a simplicity beyond all comprehension, ancient and young as spring, illimitable,
pellucid, drew him with cords of infinite desire into its own stillness. He went up into such a quietness, a
privacy, and a freshness that at the very moment when he stood farthest from our ordinary mode of
being he had the sense of stripping off encumbrances and awaking from trance, and coming to himself.
With a gesture of relaxation he looked about him. ...
The animals had gone. The two white figures had disappeared. Tor and Tinidril and he were alone, in
ordinary Perelandrian daylight, early in the morning. "Where are the beasts?" said Ransom. ' "They have
gone about their small affairs," said Tinidril. "They have gone to bring up their whelps and lay their
eggs, to build their nests and spin their webs and dig their burrows, to sing and play and to eat and
drink."
"They did not wait long," said Ransom, "for I feel it is still early in the morning." "But not the same
morning," said Tor. "We have been here long, then?" asked Ransom. "Yes," said Tor. "I did not know it
till now. But we have accomplished one whole circle about Arbol since we met on this mountain top."
"A year?" said Ransom. "A whole year? 0 Heavens, what may by now have happened in my own dark
world! Did you know. Father, that so much time was passing?"
"I did not feel it pass," said Tor. "I believe the waves of time will often change for us henceforward. We
are coming to have it in our own choice whether we shall be above them and see many waves together
or whether we shall reach them one by one as we used to."
"It comes into my mind," said Trinidril, "that today, now that the year has brought us back to the same
place in Heaven, the eldils are coming for Piebald to take him back to his own world."
"You are right, Trinidril," said Tor. Then he looked at Ransom and said, "There is a red dew coming up
out of your foot, like a little spring."
Ransom looked down and saw that his heel was still bleeding. "Yes," he said, "it is where the Evil One
bit me. The redness is of Hru (blood)."
"Sit down, friend," said Tor, "and let me wash your foot in this pool." Ransom hesitated but the King
compelled him. So presently he sat on the little bank and the King kneeled before him in the shallow
water and took the injured foot in his hand. He paused as he looked at it.
"So this is hru," he said at last. "I have never seen such a fluid before. And this is the substance
wherewith Maleldil remade the worlds before any world was made."
He washed the foot for a long time but the bleeding did not stop. "Does it mean that Piebald will die?"
said Tinidril at last.
"I do not think so," said Tor. "I think that any of his race who has breathed the air that he has breathed
and drunk the waters that he has drunk since he came to the Holy Mountain will not find it easy to die.
Tell me. Friend, was it not so in your world that after they had lost their paradise the men of your race
did not learn to die quickly?"
"I had heard," said Ransom, "that those first generations were long livers, but most take it for only a
Story or a Poetry and I had not thought of the cause."
"Oh!" said Tinidril suddenly. "The eldila are come to take him."
Ransom looked round and saw, not the white manlike forms in which he had last seen Mars and Venus,
but only the almost invisible lights. The King and Queen apparently recognised the spirits in this guise
also: as easily, he thought, as an earthly King would recognise his acquaintance even when they were
not in court dress.
The King released Ransom's foot and all three of them went towards the white casket. Its covering lay
beside it on the ground. All felt an impulse to delay.
"What is this that we feel. Tor?" said Tinidril. "I don't know," said the King. "One day I will give it a
name. This is not a day for making names."
"It is like a fruit with a very thick shell," said Tinidril. "The joy of our meeting when we meet again in
the Great Dance is the sweet of it. But the rind is thick-more years thick than I can count."
"You see now," said Tor, "what that Evil One would have done to us. If we listened to him we should
now be trying to get at that sweet without biting through the shell."
"And so it would not be 'That sweet' at all," said Tinidril. "It is now his time to go," said the tingling
voice of an eldil. Ransom found no words to say as he laid himself down in the casket. The sides rose up
high above him like walls: beyond them, as if framed in a coffin-shaped window, he saw the golden sky
and the faces of Tor and Tinidril. "You must cover my eyes," he said presently: and the two human
forms went out of sight for a moment and returned. Their arms were full of the rose-red lilies. Both bent
down and kissed him. He saw the King's hand lifted in blessing and then never saw anything again in
that world. They covered his face with the cool petals till he was blinded in a red sweet-smelling cloud.
"Is it ready?" said the King's voice. "Farewell, Friend and Saviour, farewell," said both voices. "Farewell
till we three pass out of the dimensions of time. Speak of us always to Maleldil as we speak always of
you. The splendour, the love, and the strength be upon you."
Then came the great cumbrous noise of the lid being fastened on above him. Then, for a few seconds,
noises without, in the world from which he was eternally divided. Then his consciousness was engulfed.
I SEEMED to be standing in a bus queue by the side of a long, mean street. Evening was just
closing in and it was raining. I had been wandering for hours in similar mean streets, always in the
rain and always in evening twilight. Time seemed to have paused on that dismal moment when
only a few shops have lit up and it is not yet dark enough for their windows to look cheering. And
just as the evening never advanced to night, so my walking had never brought me to the better parts
of the town. However far I went I found only dingy lodging houses, small tobacconists, hoardings
from which posters hung in rags, windowless warehouses, goods stations without trains, and
bookshops of the sort that sell The Works of Aristotle. I never met anyone. But for the little crowd
at the bus stop, the whole town seemed to be empty. I think that was why I attached myself to the
queue.
I had a stroke of luck right away, for just as I took my stand a little waspish woman who would
have been ahead of me snapped out at a man who seemed to be with her, "Very well, then. I won't
go at all. So there," and left the queue. "Pray don't imagine," said the man, in a very dignified voice,
"that I care about going in the least. I have only been trying to please you, for peace sake. My own
feelings are of course a matter of no importance. I quite understand that"-and suiting the action to
the word he also walked away. "Come," thought I, "that's two places gained." I was now next to a
very short man with a scowl who glanced at me with an expression of extreme disfavour and
observed, rather unnecessarily loudly, to the man beyond him, "This sort of thing really makes one
think twice about going at all." "What sort of thing?" growled the other, a big beefy person. "Well,"
said the Short Man, "this is hardly the sort of society I'm used to as a matter of fact." "Huh!" said
the Big Man: and then added with a glance at me, "Don't you stand any sauce from him, Mister.
You're not afraid of him, are you?" Then, seeing I made no move, he rounded suddenly on the
Short Man and said, "Not good enough for you, aren't we? Like your lip." Next moment he had
fetched the Short Man one on the side of the face that sent him sprawling into the gutter. "Let him
lay, let him lay," said the Big Man to no-one in particular. "I'm a plain man that's what I am and I
got to have my rights same as anyone else, see?" As the Short Man showed no disposition to rejoin
the queue and soon began limping away, I closed up, rather cautiously, behind the Big Man and
congratulated myself on having gained yet another step. A moment later two young people in front
of him also left us arm in arm. They were both so trousered, slender, giggly and falsetto that I could
be sure of the sex of neither, but it was clear that each for the moment preferred the other to the
chance of a place in the bus. "We shall never all get in," said a female voice with a whine in it from
some four places ahead of me. "Change places with you for five bob, lady," said someone else. I
heard the clink of money and then a scream in the female voice, mixed with roars of laughter from
the rest of the crowd. The cheated woman leaped out of her place to fly at the man who had bilked
her, but the others immediately closed up and flung her out. ... So what with one thing and another
the queue had reduced itself to manageable proportions long before the bus appeared. It was a
wonderful vehicle, blazing with golden light, heraldically coloured. The Driver himself seemed full
of light and he used only one hand to drive with. The other he waved before his face as if to fan
away the greasy steam of the rain. A growl went up from the queue as he came in sight. "Looks as
if he had a good time of it, eh? ... Bloody pleased with himself, I bet. ... My dear, why can't he
behave naturally?-Thinks himself too good to look at us. ... Who does he imagine he is? ... All that
gilding and purple, I call it a wicked waste. Why don't they spend some of the money on their
house property down here?- God! I'd like to give him one in the ear-'ole." I could see nothing in the
countenance of the Driver to justify all this, unless it were that he had a look of authority and
seemed intent on carrying out his job.
My fellow passengers fought like hens to get on board the bus though there was plenty of room for
us all. I was the last to get in. The bus was only half full and I selected a seat at the back, well away
from the others. But a tousle-headed youth at once came and sat down beside me. As he did so we
moved off.
"I thought you wouldn't mind my tacking on to you," he said, "for I've noticed that you feel just as I
do about the present company. Why on earth they insist on coming I can't imagine. They won't like
it at all when we get there, and they'd really be much more comfortable at home. It's different for
you and me." "Do they like this place?" I asked. "As much as they'd like anything," he answered.
"They've got cinemas and fish and chip shops and advertisements and all the sorts of things they
want. The appalling lack of any intellectual life doesn't worry them. I realised as soon as I got here
that there'd been some mistake. I ought to have taken the first bus but I've fooled about trying to
wake people up here. I found a few fellows I'd known before and tried to form a little circle, but
they all seem to have sunk to the level of their surroundings. Even before we came here I'd had
some doubts about a man like Cyril Blellow. I always thought he was working in a false idiom. But
he was at least intelligent: one could get some criticism worth hearing from him, even if he was a
failure on the creative side. But now he seems to have nothing left but his self-conceit. The last
time I tried to read him some of my own stuff . . . but wait a minute, I'd just like you to look at it."
Realising with a shudder that what he was producing from his pocket was a thick wad of
typewritten paper, I muttered something about not having my spectacles and exclaimed, "Hullo!
We've left the ground."
It was true. Several hundred feet below us, already half hidden in the rain and mist, the wet roofs of
the town appeared, spreading without a break as far as the eye could reach.
2.
I WAS not left very long at the mercy of the Tousle-Headed Poet, because another passenger
interrupted our conversation: but before that happened I had learned a good deal about him. He
appeared to be a singularly ill-used man. His parents had never appreciated him and none of the
five schools at which he had been educated seemed to have made any provision for a talent and
temperament such as his. To make matters worse he had been exactly the sort of boy in whose case
the examination system works out with the maximum unfairness and absurdity. It was not until he
reached the university that he began to recognise that all these injustices did not come by chance
but were the inevitable results of our economic system. Capitalism did not merely enslave the
workers, it also vitiated taste and vulgarised intellect: hence our educational system and hence the
lack of "Recognition" for new genius. This discovery had made him a Communist. But when the
war came along and he saw Russia in alliance with the capitalist governments, he had found
himself once more isolated and had to become a conscientious objector. The indignities he suffered
at this stage of his career had, he confessed, embittered him. He decided he could serve the cause
best by going to America: but then America came into the war too. It was at this point that he
suddenly saw Sweden as the home of a really new and radical art, but the various oppressors had
given him no facilities for going to Sweden. There were money troubles. His father, who had never
progressed beyond the most atrocious mental complacency and smugness of the Victorian epoch,
was giving him a ludicrously inadequate allowance. And he had been very badly treated by a girl
too. He had thought her a really civilised and adult personality, and then she had unexpectedly
revealed that she was a mass of bourgeois prejudices and monogamic instincts. Jealousy,
possessiveness, was a quality he particularly disliked. She had even shown herself, at the end, to be
mean about money. That was the last straw. He had jumped under a train. . . .
I gave a start, but he took no notice.
Even then, he continued, ill luck had continued to dog him. He'd been sent to the grey town. But of
course it was a mistake. I would find, he assured me, that all the other passengers would be with me
on the return journey. But he would not. He was going to stay "there." He felt quite certain that he
was going where, at last, his finely critical spirit would no longer be outraged by an uncongenial
environment-where he would find "Recognition" and "Appreciation." Meanwhile, since I hadn't got
my glasses, he would read me the passage about which Cyril Blellow had been so insensitive. . . .
It was just then that we were interrupted. One of the quarrels which were perpetually simmering in
the bus had boiled over and for a moment there was a stampede. Knives were drawn: pistols were
fired: but it all seemed strangely innocuous and when it was over I found myself unharmed, though
in a different seat and with a new companion. He was an intelligent-looking man with a rather
bulbous nose and a bowler hat. I looked out of the windows. We were now so high that all below us
had become featureless. But fields, rivers, or mountains I did not see, and I got the impression that
the grey town still filled the whole field of vision.
"It seems the deuce of a town," I volunteered, "and that's what I can't understand. The parts of it
that I saw were so empty. Was there once a much larger population?"
"Not at all," said my neighbour. "The trouble is that they're so quarrelsome. As soon as anyone
arrives he settles in some street. Before he's been there twenty-four hours he quarrels with his
neighbour. Before the week is over he's quarrelled so badly that he decides to move. Very like he
finds the next street empty because all the people there have quarrelled with their neighbours-and
moved. So he settles in. If by any chance the street is full, he goes further. But even if he stays, it
makes no odds. He's sure to have another quarrel pretty soon and then he'll move on again. Finally
he'll move right out to the edge of the town and build a new house. You see, it's easy here. You've
only got to think a house and there it is. That's how the town keeps on growing." "Leaving more
and more empty streets?" "That's right. And time's sort of odd here. That place where we caught the
bus is thousands of miles from the Civic Centre where all the newcomers arrive from earth. All the
people you've met were living near the bus stop: but they'd taken centuries-of our time-to get there,
by gradual removals."
"And what about the earlier arrivals? I mean -there must be people who came from earth to your
town even longer ago."
"That's right. There are. They've been moving on and on. Getting further apart. They're so far off by
now that they could never think of coming to the bus stop at all. Astronomical distances. There's a
bit of rising ground near where I live and a chap has a telescope. You can see the lights of the
inhabited houses, where those old ones live, millions of miles away. Millions of miles from us and
from one another. Every now and then they move further still. That's one of the disappointments. I
thought you'd meet interesting historical characters. But you don't: they're too far away."
"Would they get to the bus stop in time, if they ever set out?"
"Well-theoretically. But it'd be a distance of light-years. And they wouldn't want to by now: not
those old chaps like Tamberlaine and Genghis Khan, or Julius Caesar, or Henry the Fifth."
"Wouldn't want to?"
"That's right. The nearest of those old ones is Napoleon. We know that because two chaps made the
journey to see him. They'd started long before I came, of course, but I was there when they came
back. About fifteen thousand years of our time it took them. We've picked out the house by now.
Just a little pin prick of light and nothing else near it for millions of miles."
"But they got there?"
"That's right. He'd built himself a huge house all in the Empire style-rows of windows flaming with
light, though it only shows as a pin prick from where I live." "Did they see Napoleon?" "That's
right. They went up and looked through one of the windows. Napoleon was there all right." "What
was he doing?" "Walking up and down-up and down all the time-left-right, left-right-never
stopping for a moment. The two chaps watched him for about a year and he never rested. And
muttering to himself all the time. 'It was Soult's fault. It was Ney's fault. It was Josephine's fault. It
was the fault of the Russians. It was the fault of the English.' Like that all the time. Never stopped
for a moment. A little, fat man and he looked kind of tired. But he didn't seem able to stop it."
From the vibrations I gathered that the bus was still moving, but there was now nothing to be seen
from the windows which confirmed this -nothing but grey void above and below.
"Then the town will go on spreading indefinitely?"! said.
"That's right," said the Intelligent Man. "Unless someone can do something about it." "How do
you mean?"
"Well, as a matter of fact, between you and me and the wall, that's my job at the moment. What's
the trouble about this place? Not that people are quarrelsome-that's only human nature and was
always the same even on earth. The trouble is they have no Needs. You get everything you want
(not very good quality, of course) by just imagining it. That's why it never costs any trouble to
move to another street or build another house. In other words, there's no proper economic basis for
any community life. If they needed real shops, chaps would have to stay near where the real shops
were. If they needed real houses, they'd have to stay near where builders were. It's scarcity that
enables a society to exist. Well, that's where I come in. I'm not going this trip for my health. As far
as that goes I don't think it would suit me up there. But if I can come back with some red
commodities-anything at all that you could really bite or drink or sit on -why, at once you'd get a
demand down in our town. I'd start a little business. I'd have something to sell. You'd soon get
people coming to live near-centralisation. Two fully-inhabited streets would accommodate the
people that are now spread over a million square miles of empty streets. I'd make a nice little profit
and be a public benefactor as well."
"You mean, if they had to live together they'd gradually learn to quarrel less?"
"Well, I don't know about that. I daresay they could be kept a bit quieter. You'd have a chance to
build up a police force. Knock some kind of discipline into them. Anyway" (here he dropped his
voice) "it'd be better, you know. Everyone admits that. Safety in numbers."
"Safety from what?" I began, but my companion nudged me to be silent. I changed my question.
"But look here," said I, "if they can get everything just by imagining it, why would they want any
real things, as you call them?"
"Eh? Oh well, they'd like houses that really kept out the rain."
"Their present houses don't?"
"Well of course not. How could they?"
"What the devil is the use of building them, then?" The Intelligent Man put his head closer to mine.
"Safety again," he muttered. "At least, the feeling of safety. It's all right now: but later on ... you
understand."
"What?" said I, almost involuntarily sinking my own voice to a whisper.
He articulated noiselessly as if expecting that I understood lip-reading. I put my ear close to his
mouth. "Speak up," I said. "It will be dark presently," he mouthed.
"You mean the evening is really going to turn into a night in the end?"
He nodded.
"What's that got to do with it?" said I.
"Well ... no one wants to be out of doors when that happens."
"Why?"
His reply was so furtive that I had to ask him several times to repeat it. When he had done so, being
a little annoyed (as one so often is with whisperers) I replied without remembering to lower my
voice.
"Who are 'They'?" I asked. "And what are you afraid they'll do to you? And why should they come
out when it's dark? And what protection could an imaginary house give if there was any danger?"
"Here!" shouted the Big Man. "Who's talking all that stuff? You stop your whispering you two if
you don't want a hiding, see? Spreading rumours, that's what I call it. You shut your face, Ikey,
see?"
"Quite right. Scandalous. Ought to be prosecuted. How did they get into the bus?" growled the
passengers.
A fat clean-shaven man who sat on the seat in front of me leaned back and addressed me in a
cultured voice.
"Excuse me," he said, "but I couldn't help overhearing parts of your conversation. It is astonishing
how these primitive superstitions linger on. I beg your pardon? Oh, God bless my soul, that's all it
is. There is not a shred of evidence that this twilight is ever going to turn into a night. There has
been a revolution of opinion on that in educated circles. I am surprised that you haven't heard of it.
All the nightmare fantasies of our ancestors are being swept away. What we now see in this
subdued and delicate half-light is the promise of the dawn: the slow turning of a whole nation
towards the light. Slow and imperceptible, of course. 'And not through Eastern windows only,
When daylight comes, comes in the light.' And that passion for 'real' commodities which our friend
speaks of is only materialism, you know. It's retrogressive. Earth-bound! A hankering for matter.
But we look on this spiritual city-for with all its faults it is spiritual- as a nursery in which the
creative functions of man, now freed from the clogs of matter, begin to try their wings. A sublime
thought."
Hours later there came a change. It began to grow light in the bus. The greyness outside the
windows turned from mud-colour to mother of pearl, then to faintest blue, then to a bright blueness
that stung the eyes. We seemed to be floating in a pure vacancy. There were no lands, no sun, no
stars in sight: only the radiant abyss. I let down the window beside me. Delicious freshness came in
for a second, and then-
"What the hell are you doing?" shouted the Intelligent Man, leaning roughly across me and pulling
the window sharply up. "Want us all to catch our death of cold?"
"Hit him a biff," said the Big Man.
I glanced round the bus. Though the windows were closed, and soon muffed, the bus was full of
light. It was cruel light. I shrank from the faces and forms by which I was surrounded. They were
all fixed faces, full not of possibilities but of impossibilities, some gaunt, some bloated, some
glaring with idiotic ferocity, some drowned beyond recovery in dreams; but all, in one way or
another, distorted and faded. One had a feeling that they might fall to pieces at any moment if the
light grew much stronger. Then-there was a mirror on the end wall of the bus-I caught sight of my
own.
And still the light grew.
3.
A CLIFF had loomed up ahead. It sank vertically beneath us so far that I could not see the bottom,
and it was dark and smooth. We were mounting all the time. At last the top of the cliff became
visible like a thin line of emerald green stretched tight as a fiddle-string. Presently we glided over
that top: we were flying above a level, grassy country through which there ran a wide river. We
were losing height now: some of the tallest tree tops were only twenty feet below us. Then,
suddenly we were at rest. Everyone had jumped up. Curses, taunts, blows, a filth of vituperation,
came to my ears as my fellow-passengers struggled to get out. A moment later, and they had all
succeeded. I was alone in the bus, and through the open door there came to me in the fresh stillness
the singing of a lark.
I got out. The light and coolness that drenched me were like those of summer morning,
early morning a minute or two before the sunrise, only that there was a certain difference. I had the
sense of being in a larger space, perhaps even a larger sort of space, than I had ever known before:
as if the sky were further off and the extent of the green plain wider than they could be on this little
ball of earth. I had got "out" in some sense which made the Solar System itself seem an indoor
affair. It gave me a feeling of freedom, but also of exposure, possibly of danger, which continued to
accompany me through all that followed. It is the impossibility of communicating that feeling, or
even of inducing you to remember it as I proceed, which makes me despair of conveying the real
quality of what I saw and heard.
At first, of course, my attention was caught by my fellow-passengers, who were still grouped about
in the neighbourhood of the omnibus, though beginning, some of them, to walk forward into the
landscape with hesitating steps. I gasped when I saw them. Now that they were in the light, they
were transparent-fully transparent when they stood between me and it, smudgy and imperfectly
opaque when they stood in the shadow of some tree. They were in fact ghosts: man-shaped stains
on the brightness of that air. One could attend to them or ignore them at will as you do with the dirt
on a window pane. I noticed that the grass did not bend under their feet: even the dew drops were
not disturbed.
Then some re-adjustment of the mind or some focussing of my eyes took place, and I saw the
whole phenomenon the other way round. The men were as they always had been; as all the men I
had known had been perhaps. It was the light, the grass, the trees that were different; made of some
different substance, so much solider than things in our country that men were ghosts by
comparison. Moved by a sudden thought, I bent down and tried to pluck a daisy which was
growing at my feet. The stalk wouldn't break. I tried to twist it, but it wouldn't twist. I tugged till
the sweat stood out on my forehead and I had lost most of the skin off my hands. The little flower
was hard, not like wood or even like iron, but like diamond. There was a leaf-a young tender beechleaf,
lying in the grass beside it. I tried to pick the leaf up: my heart almost cracked with the effort,
and I believe I did just raise it. But I had to let it go at once; it was heavier than a sack of coal. As I
stood, recovering my breath with great gasps and looking down at the daisy, I noticed that I could
see the grass not only between my feet but through them. I also was a phantom. Who will give me
words to express the terror of that discovery? "Golly!" thought I. "I'm in for it this time."
"I don't like it! I don't like it," screamed a voice, "It gives me the pip!" One of the ghosts had darted
past me, back into the bus. She never came out of it again as far as I know.
The others remained, uncertain.
"Hi, Mister," said the Big Man, addressing the Driver, "when have we got to go back?"
"You need never come back unless you want to," he replied. "Stay as long as you please." There
was an awkward pause.
"This is simply ridiculous," said a voice in my ear. One of the quieter and more respectable ghosts
had sidled up to me. "There must be some mismanagement," he continued. "What's the sense of
allowing all that riff-raff to float about here all day? Look at them. They're not enjoying it. They'd
be far happier at home. They don't even know what to do."
"I don't know very well myself," said I. "What does one do?"
"Oh me? I shall be met in a moment or two. I'm expected. I'm not bothering about that. But it's
rather unpleasant on one's first day to have the whole place crowded out with trippers. Damn it,
one's chief object in coming here at all was to avoid them!"
He drifted away from me. And I began to look about. In spite of his reference to a "crowd," the
solitude was so vast that I could hardly notice the knot of phantoms in the foreground. Greenness
and light had almost swallowed them up. But very far away I could see what might be either a great
bank of cloud or a range of mountains. Sometimes I could make out in it steep forests, farwithdrawing
valleys, and even mountain cities perched on inaccessible summits. At other times it
became indistinct. The height was so enormous that my waking sight could not have taken in such
an object at all. Light brooded on the top of it: slanting down thence it made long shadows behind
every tree on the plain. There was no change and no progression as the hours passed. The promiseor
the threat-of sunrise rested immovably up there.
Long after that I saw people coming to meet us. Because they were bright I saw them while they
were still very distant, and at first I did not know that they were people at all. Mile after mile they
drew nearer. The earth shook under their tread as their strong feet sank into the wet turf. A tiny
haze and a sweet smell went up where they had crushed the grass and scattered the dew. Some were
naked, some robed. But the naked ones did not seem less adorned, and the robes did not disguise in
those who wore them the massive grandeur of muscle and the radiant smoothness of flesh. Some
were bearded but no one in that company struck me as being of any particular age. One gets
glimpses, even in our country, of that which is ageless-heavy thought in the face of an infant, and
frolic childhood in that of a very old man. Here it was all like that. They came on steadily. I did not
entirely like it. Two of the ghosts screamed and ran for the bus. The rest of us huddled closer to one
another.
4.
As THE solid people came nearer still I noticed that they were moving with order and
determination as though each of them had marked his man in our shadowy company. "There are
going to be affecting scenes," I said to myself. "Perhaps it would not be right to look on." With that,
Isidled away on some vague pretext of doing a little exploring. A grove of huge cedars to my right
seemed attractive and I entered it. Walking proved difficult. The grass, hard as diamonds to my
unsubstantial feet, made me feel as if I were walking on wrinkled rock, and I suffered pains like
those of the mermaid in Hans Andersen. A bird ran across in front of me and I envied it. It
belonged to that country and was as real as the grass. It could bend the stalks and spatter itself with
the dew.
Almost at once I was followed by what I have called the Big Man-to speak more accurately, the
Big Ghost. He in his turn was followed by one of the bright people. "Don't you know me?" he
shouted to the Ghost: and I found it impossible not to turn and attend. The face of the solid spirit-he
was one of those that wore a robe-made me want to dance, it was so jocund, so established in its
youthfulness.
"Well, I'm damned," said the Ghost. "I wouldn't have believed it. It's a fair knock-out. It isn't right,
Len, you know. What about poor Jack, eh? You look pretty pleased with yourself, but what I say is,
What about poor Jack?"
"He is here," said the other. "You will meet him soon, if you stay." "But you murdered him." "Of
course I did. It is all right now." "All right, is it? All right for you, you mean. But what about the
poor chap himself, laying cold and dead?"
"But he isn't. I have told you, you will meet him soon. He sent you his love."
"What I'd like to understand," said the Ghost, "is what you're here for, as pleased as Punch, you, a
bloody murderer, while I've been walking the streets down there and living in a place like a pigstye
all these years."
"That is a little hard to understand at first. But it is all over now. You will be pleased about it
presently. Till then there is no need to bother about it."
"No need to bother about it? Aren't you ashamed of yourself?"
"No. Not as you mean. I do not look at myself. I have given up myself. I had to, you know, after the
murder. That was what it did for me. And that was how everything began."
"Personally," said the Big Ghost with an emphasis which contradicted the ordinary meaning of the
word, "personally, I'd have thought vou and I ought to be the other way round. That's my personal
opinion."
"Verv likelv we soon shall be." said the other. "If you'll stop thinking about it."
"Look at me, now," said the Ghost, slapping its chest (but the slap made no noise). "I gone straight
all my life. I don't say I was a religious man and I don't sav I had no faults, far from it. But I done
my best all my life, see? I done my best by everyone, that's the sort of chap I was. I never asked for
anything that wasn't mine by rights. If I wanted a drink I paid for it and if I took my wages I done
my job, see? That's the sort I was and I don't care who knows it."
"It would be much better not to go on about that now."
"Who's going on? I'm not arguing. I'm just telling you the sort of chap I was, see? I'm asking for
nothing but my rights. You may think you can put me down because you're dressed up like that
(which you weren't when you worked under me) and I'm only a poor man. But I got to have my
rights same as you, see?"
"Oh no. It's not so bad as that. I haven't got my rights, or I should not be here. You will not get
yours either. You'll get something far better. Never fear."
"That's just what I say. I haven't got my rights. I always done my best and I never done nothing
wrong. And what I don't see is why I should be put below a bloody murderer like you."
"Who knows whether you will be? Only be happy and come with me."
"What do you keep on arguing for? I'm only telling you the sort of chap I am. I only want my
rights. I'm not asking for anybody's bleeding charity."
"Then do. At once. Ask for the Bleeding Charity. Everything is here for the asking and nothing can
be bought."
"That may be very well for you, I daresay. If they choose to let in a bloody murderer all because he
makes a poor mouth at the last moment, that's their lookout. But I don't see myself going in the
same boat with you, see? Why should I? I don't want charity. I'm a decent man and if I had my
rights I'd have been here long ago and you can tell them I said so."
The other shook his head. "You can never do it like that," he said. "Your feet will never grow hard
enough to walk on our grass that way. You'd be tired out before we got to the mountains. And it
isn't exactly true, you know." Mirth danced in his eyes as he said it.
"What isn't true?" asked the Ghost sulkily.
"You weren't a decent man and you didn't do your best. We none of us were and we none of us did.
Lord bless you, it doesn't matter. There is no need to go into it all now."
"You!" gasped the Ghost. "You have the face to tell me I wasn't a decent chap?"
"Of course. Must I go into all that? I will tell you one thing to begin with. Murdering old Jack
wasn't the worst thing I did. That was the work of a moment and I was half mad when I did it. But I
murdered you in my heart, deliberately, for years. I used to lie awake at nights thinking what I'd do
to you if ever I got the chance. That is why I have been sent to you now: to ask your forgiveness
and to be your servant as long as you need one, and longer if it pleases vou. I was the worst. But all
the men who worked under vou felt the same. You made it hard for us, you know. And vou made it
hard for your wife too and for your children."
"You mind your own business, young man," said the Ghost. "None of your lip, see? Because I'm
not taking anv impudence from you about my private affairs."
"There are no private affairs," said the other.
"And I'll tell you another thing," said the Ghost. "You can clear off, see? You're not wanted. I may
be only a poor man but I'm not making pals with a murderer, let alone taking lessons from him.
Made it hard for you and your like, did I? If I had you back there I'd show you what work is."
"Come and show me now," said the other with laughter in his voice. "It will be joy going to the
mountains, but there will be plenty of work."
"You don't suppose I'd go with you?" "Don't refuse. You will never get there alone. And I am the
one who was sent to you."
"So that's the trick, is it?" shouted the Ghost, outwardly bitter, and yet I thought there was a kind of
triumph in its voice. It had been entreated: it could make a refusal: and this seemed to it a kind of
advantage. "I thought there'd be some damned nonsense. It's all a clique, all a bloody clique. Tell
them I'm not coming, see? I'd rather be damned than go along with you. I came here to get my
rights, see? Not to go snivelling along on charity tied onto your apron-strings. If they're too fine to
have me without you, I'll go home." It was almost happy now that it could, in a sense, threaten.
"That's what I'll do," it repeated, "I'll go home, I didn't come here to be treated like a dog. I'll go
home. That's what I'll do. Damn and blast the whole pack of you . . ." In the end, still grumbling,
but whimpering also a little as it picked its way over the sharp grasses, it made off.
5.
FOR A moment there was silence under the cedar trees and then-pad, pad, pad-it was broken. Two
velvet-footed lions came bouncing into the open space, their eyes fixed upon each other, and started
playing some solemn romp. Their manes looked as if they had been just dipped in the river whose
noise I could hear close at hand, though the trees hid it. Not greatly liking my company, I moved
away to find that river, and after passing some thick flowering bushes, I succeeded. The bushes
came almost down to the brink. It was as smooth as Thames but flowed swiftly like a mountain
stream: pale green where trees overhung it but so clear that I could count the pebbles at the bottom.
Close beside me I saw another of the Bright People in conversation with a ghost. It was that fat
ghost with the cultured voice who had addressed me in the bus, and it seemed to be wearing gaiters.
"My dear boy, I'm delighted to see you," it was saying to the Spirit, who was naked and almost
blindingly white. "I was talking to your poor father the other day and wondering where you were."
"You didn't bring him?" said the other.
"Well, no. He lives a long way from the bus, and, to be quite frank, he's been getting a little
eccentric lately. A little difficult. Losing his grip. He never was prepared to make any great efforts,
you know. If you remember, he used to go to sleep when you and I got talking seriously! Ah, Dick,
I shall never forget some of our talks. I expect you've changed your views a bit since then. You
became rather narrow-minded towards the end of your life: but no doubt you've broadened out
again."
"How do you mean?"
"Well, it's obvious by now, isn't it, that you weren't quite right. Why, my dear boy, you were
coming to believe in a literal Heaven and Hell!"
"But wasn't I right?"
"Oh, in a spiritual sense, to be sure. I still believe in them in that way. I am still, my dear boy,
looking for the Kingdom. But nothing superstitious or mythological. . . ."
"Excuse me. Where do you imagine you've been?"
"Ah, I see. You mean that the grey town with its continual hope of morning (we must all live by
hope, must we not?), with its field for indefinite progress, is, in a sense, Heaven, if only we have
eyes to see it? That is a beautiful idea."
"I didn't mean that at all. Is it possible you don't know where you've been?"
"Now that you mention it, I don't think we ever do give it a name. What do you call it?"
"We call it Hell."
"There is no need to be profane, my dear boy. I may not be very orthodox, in your sense of that
word, but I do feel that these matters ought to be discussed simply, and seriously, and reverently."
"Discuss Hell reverently? I meant what I said. You have been in Hell: though if you don't go back
you may call it Purgatory."
"Go on, my dear boy, go on. That is so like you. No doubt you'll tell me why, on your view, I was
sent there. I'm not angry."
"But don't you know? You went there because you are an apostate."
"Are you serious, Dick?"
"Perfectly."
"This is worse than I expected. Do you really think people are penalised for their honest opinions?
Even assuming, for the sake of argument, that those opinions were mistaken."
"Do you really think there are no sins of intellect?"
"There are indeed, Dick. There is hidebound prejudice, and intellectual dishonesty, and timidity,
and stagnation. But honest opinions fearlessly followed-they are not sins."
"I know we used to talk that way. I did it too until the end of my life when I became what you call
narrow. It all turns on what are honest opinions."
"Mine certainly were. They were not only honest but heroic. I asserted them fearlessly. When the
doctrine of the Resurrection ceased to commend itself to the critical faculties which God had given
me, I openly rejected it. I preached my famous sermon. I defied the whole chapter. I took every
risk."
"What risk? What was at all likely to come of it except what actually came-popularity, sales for
your books, invitations, and finally a bishopric?"
"Dick, this is unworthy of you. What are you suggesting?"
"Friend, I am not suggesting at all. You see, I know now. Let us be frank. Our opinions were not
honestly come by. We simply found ourselves in contact with a certain current of ideas and
plunged into it because it seemed modern and successful. At College, you know, we just started
automatically writing the kind of essays that got good marks and saying the kind of things that won
applause. When, in our whole lives, did we honestly face, in solitude, the one question on which all
turned: whether after all the Supernatural might not in fact occur? When did we put up one
moment's real resistance to the loss of our faith?"
"If this is meant to be a sketch of the genesis of liberal theology in general, I reply that it is a mere
libel. Do you suggest that men like ..."
"I have nothing to do with any generality. Nor with any man but me and you. Oh, as you love your
own soul, remember. You know that you and I were playing with loaded dice. We didn't want the
other to be true. We were afraid of crude salvationism, afraid of a breach with the spirit of the age,
afraid of ridicule, afraid (above all) of real spiritual fears and hopes."
"I'm far from denying that young men may make mistakes. They may well be influenced by current
fashions of thought. But it's not a question of how the opinions are formed. The point is that they
were my honest opinions, sincerely expressed."
"Of course. Having allowed oneself to drift, unresisting, unpraying, accepting every half-conscious
solicitation from our desires, we reached a point where we no longer believed the Faith. Just in the
same way, a jealous man, drifting and unresisting, reaches a point at which he believes lies about
his best friend: a drunkard reaches a point at which (for the moment) he actually believes that
another glass will do him no harm. The beliefs are sincere in the sense that they do occur as
psychological events in the man's mind. If that's what you mean by sincerity they are sincere, and
so were ours. But errors which are sincere in that sense are not innocent."
"You'll be justifying the Inquisition in a moment!"
"Why? Because the Middle Ages erred in one direction, does it follow that there is no error in the
opposite direction?"
"Well, this is extremely interesting," said the Episcopal Ghost. "It's a point of view. Certainly, it's a
point of view. In the meantime . . ."
"There is no meantime," replied the other. "AH that is over. We are not playing now. I have been
talking of the past (your past and mine) only in order that you may turn from it forever. One wrench
and the tooth will be out. You can begin as if nothing had ever gone wrong. White as snow. It's all
true, you know. He is in me, for you, with that power. And- I have come a long journey to meet
you. You have seen Hell: you are in sight of Heaven. Will you, even now, repent and believe?"
"I'm not sure that I've got the exact point you are trying to make," said the Ghost.
"I am not trying to make any point," said the Spirit. "I am telling you to repent and believe."
"But my dear boy, I believe already. We may not be perfectly agreed, but you have completely
misjudged me if you do not realise that my religion is a very real and a very precious thing to me."
"Very well," said the other, as if changing his plan. "Will you believe in me?"
"In what sense?"
"Will you come with me to the mountains? It will hurt at first, until your feet are hardened. Reality
is harsh to the feet of shadows. But will you come?"
"Well, that is a plan. I am perfectly ready to consider it. Of course I should require some assurances
... I should want a guarantee that you are taking me to a place where I shall find a wider sphere of
usefulness-and scope for the talents that God has given me-and an atmosphere of free inquiry-in
short, all that one means by civilisation and-er-the spiritual life."
"No," said the other. "I can promise you none of these things. No sphere of usefulness: you are not
needed there at all. No scope for your talents: only forgiveness for having perverted them. No
atmosphere of inquiry, for I will bring you to the land not of questions but of answers, and you
shall see the face of God."
"Ah, but we must all interpret those beautiful words in our own way! For me there is no such thing
as a final answer. The free wind of inquiry must always continue to blow through the mind, must it
not? Trove all things' . . . to travel hopefully is better than to arrive."
"If that were true, and known to be true, how could anyone travel hopefully? There would be
nothing to hope for."
"But you must feel yourself that there is something stifling about the idea of finality? Stagnation,
my dear boy, what is more soul-destroying than stagnation?"
"You think that, because hitherto you have experienced truth only with the abstract intellect. I will
bring you where you can taste it like honey and be embraced by it as by a bridegroom. Your thirst
shall be quenched."
"Well, really, you know, I am not aware of a thirst for some ready-made truth which puts an end to
intellectual activity in the way you seem to be describing. Will it leave me the free play of Mind,
Dick? I must insist on that, you know."
"Free, as a man is free to drink while he is drinking. He is not free still to be dry." The Ghost
seemed to think for a moment. "I can make nothing of that idea," it said.
"Listen!" said the White Spirit. "Once you were a child. Once you knew what inquiry was for.
There was a time when you asked questions because you wanted answers, and were glad when you
had found them. Become that child again: even now."
"Ah, but when I became a man I put away childish things."
"You have gone far wrong. Thirst was made for water; inquiry for truth. What you now call the free
play of inquiry has neither more nor less to do with the ends for which intelligence was given you
than masturbation has to do with marriage."
"If we cannot be reverent, there is at least no need to be obscene. The suggestion that I should
return at my age to the mere factual in-quisitiveness of boyhood strikes me as preposterous. In any
case, that question-and-answer conception of thought only applies to matters of fact. Religious and
speculative questions are surely on a different level."
"We know nothing of religion here: we think only of Christ. We know nothing of speculation.
Come and see. I will bring you to Eternal Fact, the Father of all other facthood."
"I should object very strongly to describing God as a 'fact.' The Supreme Value would surely be a
less inadequate description. It is hardly . . ."
"Do you not even believe that He exists?"
"Exists? What does Existence mean? You will keep on implying some sort of static, ready-made
reality which is, so to speak, 'there,' and to which our minds have simply to conform. These great
mysteries cannot be approached in that way. If there were such a thing (there is no need to
interrupt, my dear boy) quite frankly, I should not be interested in it. It would be of no religions
significance. God, for me, is something purely spiritual. The spirit of sweetness and light and
tolerance-and, er, service, Dick, service. We mustn't forget that, you know."
"If the thirst of the Reason is really dead . . . ," said the Spirit, and then stopped as though
pondering. Then suddenly he said, "Can you, at least, still desire happiness?"
"Happiness, my dear Dick," said the Ghost placidly, "happiness, as you will come to see when you
are older, lies in the path of duty. Which reminds me. . . . Bless my soul, I'd nearly forgotten. Of
course I can't come with you. I have to be back next Friday to read a paper. We have a little
Theological Society down there. Oh yes! there is plenty of intellectual life. Not of a very high
quality, perhaps. One notices a certain lack of grip-a certain confusion of mind. That is where I can
be of some use to them. There are even regrettable jealousies. ... I don't know why, but tempers
seem less controlled than they used to be. Still, one mustn't expect too much of human nature. I feel
I can do a great work among them. But you've never asked me what my paper is about! I'm taking
the text about growing up to the measure of the stature of Christ and working out an idea which I
feel sure you'll be interested in. I'm going to point out how people always forget that Jesus (here the
Ghost bowed) was a comparatively young man when he died. He would have outgrown some of his
earlier views, you know, if he'd lived. As he might have done, with a little more tact and patience. I
am going to ask my audience to consider what his mature views would have been. A profoundly
interesting question. What a different Christianity we might have had if only the Founder had
reached his full stature! I shall end up by pointing out how this deepens the significance of the
Crucifixion. One feels for the first time what a disaster it was: what a tragic waste ... so much
promise cut short. Oh, must you be going? Well, so must I. Goodbye, my dear boy. It has been a
great pleasure. Most stimulating and provocative. Goodbye, goodbye, goodbye."
The Ghost nodded its head and beamed on the Spirit with a bright clerical smile-or with the best
approach to it which such unsubstantial lips could manage-and then turned away hummin? softly to
itself "City of God, how broad and far."
But I did not watch him long, for a new idea had just occurred to me. If the grass were hard as rock,
I thought, would not the water be hard enough to walk on? I tried it with one foot, and my foot did
not go in. Next moment I stepped boldly out on the surface. I fell on my face at once and got some
nasty bruises. I had forgotten that though it was, to me, solid, it was not the less in rapid motion.
When I had picked myself up I was about thirty yards further down-stream than the point where I
had left the bank. But this did not prevent me from walking up-stream: it only meant that by
walking very fast indeed I made very little progress.
6.
THE COOL smooth skin of the bright water was delicious to my feet and I walked on it for about
an hour, making perhaps a couple of hundred yards. Then the going became different. The current
grew swifter. Great flakes or islands of foam came swirling down towards me, bruising my shins
like stones if I did not get out of their way. The surface became uneven, rounded itself into lovely
hollows and elbows of water which distorted the appearance of the pebbles on the bottom and
threw me off my balance, so that I had to scramble to shore. But as the banks hereabouts consisted
of great flat stones, I continued my journey without much hurt to my feet. An immense yet lovely
noise vibrated through the forest. Hours later I rounded a bend and saw the explanation.
Before me green slopes made a wide amphitheatre, enclosing a frothy and pulsating lake into
which, over many-coloured rocks, a waterfall was pouring. Here once again I realised that
something had happened to my senses so that they were now receiving impressions which would
normally exceed their capacity. On earth, such a waterfall could not have been perceived at all as a
whole; it was too big. Its sound would have been a terror in the woods for twenty miles. Here, after
the first shock, my sensibility "took" both, as a well-built ship takes a huge wave. I exulted. The
noise, though gigantic, was like giant's laughter: like the revelry of a whole college of giants
together laughing, dancing, singing, roaring at their high works.
Near the place where the fall plunged into the lake there grew a tree. Wet with the spray, halfveiled
in foam-bows, flashing with the bright, innumerable birds that flew among its branches, it
rose in many shapes of billowy foliage, huge as a fen-land cloud. From every point apples of gold
gleamed through the leaves.
Suddenly my attention was diverted by a curious appearance in the foreground. A hawthorn bush
not twenty yards away seemed to be behaving oddly. Then I saw that it was not the bush but
something standing close to the bush and on this side of it. Finally I realised that it was one of the
Ghosts. It was crouching as if to conceal itself from something beyond the bush, and it was looking
back at me and making signals. It kept on signing to me to duck down. As I could not see what the
danger was, I stood fast.
Presently the Ghost, after peering around in every direction, ventured beyond the hawthorn bush. It
could not get on very fast because of the torturing grasses beneath its feet, but it was obviously
going as fast as it possibly could, straight for another tree. There it stopped again, standing straight
upright against the trunk as though it were taking cover. Because the shadow of the branches now
covered it, I could see it better: it was my bowler-hatted companion, the one whom the Big Ghost
had called Ikey. After it had stood panting at the tree for about ten minutes and carefully
reconnoitred the ground ahead, it made a dash for another tree-such a dash as was possible to it. In
this way, with infinite labour and caution, it had reached the great Tree in about an hour. That is, it
had come within ten yards of it.
Here it was checked. Round the Tree grew a belt of lilies: to the Ghost an insuperable obstacle. It
might as well have tried to tread down an anti-tank trap as to walk on them. It lay down and tried to
crawl between them but they grew too close and they would not bend. And all the time it was
apparently haunted by the terror of discovery. At every whisper of the wind it stopped and
cowered: once, at the cry of a bird, it struggled back to its last place of cover: but then desire
hounded it out again and it crawled once more to the Tree. I saw it clasp its hands and writhe in the
agony of its frustration.
The wind seemed to be rising. I saw the Ghost wring its hands and put its thumb into its mouthcruelly
pinched, I doubt not, between two stems of the lilies when the breeze swayed them. Then
came a real gust. The branches of the Tree began to toss. A moment later and half a dozen apples
had fallen round the Ghost and on it. He gave a sharp cry, but suddenly checked it. I thought the
weight of the golden fruit where it had fallen on him would have disabled him: and certainly, for a
few minutes, he was unable to rise. He lay whimpering, nursing his wounds. But soon he was at
work again. I could see him feverishly trying to fill his pockets with the apples. Of course it was
useless. One could see how his ambitions were gradually forced down. He gave up the idea of a
pocketful: two would have to do. He gave up the idea of two, he would take one, the largest. He
gave up that hope. He was not looking for the smallest one. He was trying to find if there was one
small enough to carry.
The amazing thing was that he succeeded. When I remembered what the leaf had felt like when I
tried to lift it, I could hardly help admiring this unhappy creature when I saw him rise staggering to
his feet actually holding the smallest of the apples in his hands. He was lame from his hurts, and the
weight bent him double. Yet even so, inch bv inch, still availing himself of every scrap of cover, he
set out on his via dolorosa to the bus, carrying his torture.
"Fool. Put it down," said a great voice suddenly. It was quite unlike anv other voice I had heard so
far. It was a thunderous yet liquid voice. With an appalling certainty I knew that the waterfall itself
was speaking: and I saw now (though it did not cease to look like a waterfall) that it was also a
bright angel who stood, like one crucified, against the rocks and poured himself perpetually down
towards the forest with loud joy.
"Fool," he said, "put it down. You cannot take it back. There is not room for it in Hell. Stay here
and learn to eat such apples. The very leaves and the blades of grass in the wood will delight to
teach you."
Whether the Ghost heard or not, I don't know. At any rate, after pausing for a few minutes, it
braced itself anew for its agonies and continued with even greater caution till I lost sight of it.
7.
ALTHOUGH I watched the misfortunes of the Ghost in the Bowler with some complacency, I
found, when we were left alone, that I could not bear the presence of the Water-Giant. It did not
appear to take any notice of me, but I became self-conscious; and I rather think there was some
assumed nonchalance in my movements as I walked away over the flat rocks, down-stream again. I
was beginning to be tired. Looking at the silver fish which darted over the river-bed, I wished
greatly that to me also that water were permeable. I should have liked a dip.
"Thinking of going back?" said a voice close at hand. I turned and saw a tall ghost standing with its
back against a tree, chewing a ghostly cheroot. It was that of a lean hard-bitten man with grev hair
and a gruff, but not uneducated voice: the kind of man I have always instinctively felt to be reliable.
"I don't know," said I. "Are you?"
"Yes," it replied. "I guess I've seen about all there is to see."
"You don't think of staying?"
"That's all propaganda," it said. "Of course there never was any question of our staying. You can't
eat the fruit and you can't drink the water and it takes you all your time to walk on the grass. A
human being couldn't live here. All that idea of staying is only an advertisement stunt."
"Then why did you come?"
"Oh, I don't know. Just to have a look round. I'm the sort of chap who likes to see things for
himself. Wherever I've been I've always had a look at anything that was being cracked up. When I
was out East, I went to see Pekin. When . . ."
"What was Pekin like?"
"Nothing to it. Just one darn wall inside another. Just a trap for tourists. I've been pretty well
everywhere. Niagara Falls, the Pyramids, Salt Lake City, the Taj Mahal-----"
"What was it like?"
"Not worth looking at. They're all advertisement stunts. All run by the same people. There's a
combine, you know, a World Combine, that just takes an Atlas and decides where they'll have a
Sight. Doesn't matter what they choose: anything'll do as long as the publicity's properly managed."
"And you've lived-er-down there-in the Town-for some time?"
"In what they call Hell? Yes. It's a flop too.
They lead you to expect red fire and devils and all sorts of interesting people sizzling on gridsHenry
VIII and all that-but when you get there its's just like any other town."
"I prefer it up here," said I.
"Well, I don't see what all the talk is about," said the Hard-Bitten Ghost. "It's as good as any other
park to look at, and darned uncomfortable."
"There seems to be some idea that if one stays here one would get-well, solider-grow acclimatised."
"I know all about that," said the Ghost. "Same old lie. People have been telling me that sort of thing
all my life. They told me in the nursery that if I were good I'd be happy. And they told me at school
that Latin would get easier as I went on. After I'd been married a month some fool was telling me
that there were always difficulties at first, but with Tact and Patience I'd soon 'settle down' and like
it! And all through two wars what didn't they say about the good time coming if only I'd be a brave
boy and go on being shot at? Of course they'll play the old game here if anyone's fool enough to
listen."
"But who are They? This might be run by someone different?"
"Entirely new management, eh? Don't you believe it! It's never a new management. You'll always
find the same old Ring. I know all about dear, kind Mummie coming up to your bedroom and
getting all she wants to know out of you: but you always found she and Father were the same firm
really. Didn't we find that both sides in all the wars were run by the same Armament Firms? or the
same Firm, which is behind the Jews and the Vatican and the Dictators and the Democracies and all
the rest of it. All this stuff up here is run by the same people as the Town. They're just laughing at
us."
"I thought they were at war?"
"Of course you did. That's the official version. But who's ever seen any signs of it? Oh, I know
that's how they talk. But if there's a real war why don't they do anything? Don't you see that if the
official version were true these chaps up here would attack and sweep the Town out of existence?
They've got the strength. If they wanted to rescue us they could do it. But obviously the last thing
they want is to end their so-called 'war.' The whole game depends on keeping it going."
This account of the matter struck me as uncomfortably plausible. I said nothing.
"Anyway," said the Ghost, "who wants to be rescued? What the hell would there be to do here?"
"Or there?" said I.
"Quite," said the Ghost. "They've got you either way."
"What would you like to do if you had your choice?" I asked.
"There you go!" said the Ghost with a certain triumph. "Asking me to make a plan. It's up to the
Management to find something that doesn't bore us, isn't it? It's their job. Why should we do it for
them? That's just where all the parsons and moralists have got the thing upside down. They keep on
asking us to alter ourselves. But if the people who run the show are so clever and so powerful, why
don't they find something to suit their public? All this poppycock about growing harder so that the
grass doesn't hurt our feet, now! There's an example. What would you say if you went to a hotel
where the eggs were all bad; and when you complained to the Boss, instead of apologising and
changing his dairyman, he just told you that if you tried you'd get to like bad eggs in time?"
"Well, I'll be getting along," said the Ghost after a short silence. "You coming my way?"
"There doesn't seem to be much point in going anywhere on your showing," I replied. A great
depression had come over me. "And at least it's not raining here."
"Not at the moment," said the Hard-Bitten Ghost. "But I never saw one of these bright mornings
that didn't turn to rain later on. And, by gum, when it does rain here! Ah, you hadn't thought of
that? It hadn't occurred to you that with the sort of water they have here every raindrop will make a
hole in you, like a machine-gun bullet. That's their little joke, you see. First of all tantalise you with
ground you can't walk on and water you can't drink and then drill you full of holes. But they won't
catch me that way."
A few minutes later he moved off.
8.
I SAT still on a stone by the river's side feeling as miserable as I ever felt in my life. Hitherto it had
not occurred to me to doubt the intentions of the Solid People, nor to question the essential
goodness of their country even if it were a country which I could not long inhabit. It had indeed
once crossed my mind that if these Solid People were as benevolent as I had heard one or two of
them claim to be, they might have done something to help the inhabitants of the Town-something
more than meeting them on the plain. Now a terrible explanation came into my mind. How if they
had never meant to do us good at all? How if this whole trip were allowed the Ghosts merely to
mock them? Horrible mvths and doctrines stirred in my memory. I thought how the Gods had
punished Tantalus. I thought of the place in the Book of Revelation where it says that the smoke of
Hell goes up forever in the sight of the blessed spirits. I remembered how poor Cowper, dreaming
that he was not after all doomed to perdition, at once knew the dream to be false and said, "These
are the sharpest arrows in His quiver." And what the Hard-Bitten Ghost had said about the rain was
clearly true. Even a shower of dew-drops from a branch might tear me in pieces. I had not thought
of this before. And how easily I might have ventured into the spray of the waterfall!
The sense of danger, which had never been entirely absent since I left the bus, awoke with sharp
urgency, I gazed around on the trees, the flowers, and the talking cataract: they had begun to look
unbearably sinister. Bright insects darted to and fro. If one of those were to fly into my face, would
it not go right through me? If it settled on my head, would it crush me to earth? Terror whispered,
"This is no place for you." I remembered also the lions.
With no very clear plan in my mind, I rose and began walking away from the river in the direction
where the trees grew closest together. I had not fully made up my mind to go back to the bus, but I
wanted to avoid open places. If only I could find a trace of evidence that it was really possible for a
Ghost to stay-that the choice were not only a cruel comedy-I would not go back. In the meantime I
went on, gingerly, and keeping a sharp look-out. In about half an hour I came to a little clearing
with some bushes in the centre. As I stopped, wondering if I dared cross it, I realised that I was not
alone.
A Ghost hobbled across the clearing-as quickly as it could on that uneasy soil-looking over its
shoulder as if it were pursued. I saw that it had been a woman: a well-dressed woman, I thought,
but its shadows of finery looked ghastly in the morning light. It was making for the bushes. It could
not really get in among them-the twigs and leaves were too hard-but it pressed as close up against
them as it could. It seemed to believe it was hiding.
A moment later I heard the sound of feet, and one of the Bright People came in sight: one always
noticed that sound there, for we Ghosts made no noise when we walked.
"Go away!" squealed the Ghost. "Go away! Can't you see I want to be alone?"
"But you need help," said the Solid One.
"If you have the least trace of decent feeling left," said the Ghost, "you'll keep away. I don't want
help. I want to be left alone. Do go away. You know I can't walk fast enough on these horrible
spikes to get away from you. It's abominable of you to take advantage."
"Oh, that!" said the Spirit. "That'll soon come right. But you're going in the wrong direction. It's
back there-to the mountains- you need to go. You can lean on me all the way. I can't absolutely
carry you, but you need have almost no weight on vour own feet: and it will hurt less at every step."
"I'm not afraid of being hurt. You know that."
"Then what is the matter?"
"Can't you understand anything? Do you really suppose I'm going out there among all those people,
like this?"
"But why not?"
"I'd never have come at all if I'd known you were all going to be dressed like that."
"Friend, you see I'm not dressed at all."
"I didn't mean that. Do go away."
"But can't you even tell me?"
"If you can't understand, there'd be no good trying to explain it. How can I go out like this among a
lot of people with real solid bodies? It's far worse than going out with nothing on would have been
on earth. Have everyone staring through me."
"Oh, I see. But we were all a bit ghostly when we first arrived, you know. That'll wear off. Just
come out and try."
"But they'll see me."
"What does it matter if they do?"
"I'd rather die."
"But you've died already. There's no good trying to go back to that."
The Ghost made a sound something between a sob and a snarl. "I wish I'd never been born," it said.
"What are we born for?"
"For infinite happiness," said the Spirit. "You can step out into it at any moment. .. ."
"But, I tell you, they'll see me."
"An hour hence and you will not care. A day hence and you will laugh at it. Don't you remember on
earth-there were things too hot to touch with your finger but you could drink them all right? Shame
is like that. If you will accept it-if you will drink the cup to the bottom-you will find it very
nourishing: but try to do anything else with it and it scalds."
"You really mean? . . ." said the Ghost, and then paused. My suspense was strained up to the height.
I felt that my own destiny hung on her reply. I could have fallen at her feet and begged her to yield.
"Yes," said the Spirit. "Come and try."
Almost, I thought the Ghost had obeyed. Certainly it had moved: but suddenly it cried out: "No, I
can't. I tell you I can't. For a moment, while you were talking, I almost thought . . . but when it
comes to the point. . . . You've no right to ask me to do a thing like that. It's disgusting. I should
never forgive myself if I did. Never, never. And it's not fair. They ought to have warned us. I'd
never have come. And now-please, please go away!"
"Friend," said the Spirit. "Could you, only for a moment, fix your mind on something not
yourself?"
"I've alreadv given you my answer," said the Ghost, coldly but still tearful.
"Then only one expedient remains," said the Spirit, and to my great surprise he set a horn to his lips
and blew. I put my hands over my ears. The earth seemed to shake: the whole wood trembled and
dindled at the sound. I suppose there must have been a pause after that (though there seemed to be
none) before I heard the thudding of hoofs-far off at first, but already nearer before I had well
identified it, and soon so near that I began to look about for some place of safety. Before I had
found one the danger was all about us. A herd of unicorns came thundering through the glades:
twenty-seven hands high the smallest of them and white as swans but for the red gleam in eyes and
nostrils and the flashing indigo of their horns. I can still remember the squelching noise of the soft
wet turf under their hoofs, the breaking of the undergrowth, the snorting and the whinneyings; how
their hind legs went up and their horned heads down in mimic battle. Even then I wondered for
what real battle it might be the rehearsal. I heard the Ghost scream, and I think it made a bolt away
from the bushes . . . perhaps towards the Spirit, but I don't know. For my own nerve failed and I
fled, not heeding, for the moment, the horrible going underfoot, and not once daring to pause. So I
never saw the end of that interview.
9.
"WHERE ARE ye going?" said a voice with a strong Scotch accent. I stopped and looked. The
sound of the unicorns had long since died away and my flight had brought me to open country. I
saw the mountains where the unchanging sunrise lay, and in the foreground two or three pines on a
little knoll, with some large smooth rocks, and heather. On one of the rocks sat a very tall man,
almost a giant, with a flowing beard. I had not yet looked one of the Solid People in the face. Now,
when I did so, I discovered that one sees them with a kind of double vision. Here was an enthroned
and shining god, whose ageless spirit weighed upon mine like a burden of solid gold: and yet, at the
very same moment, here was an old weather-beaten man, one who might have been a shepherdsuch
a man as tourists think simple because he is honest and neighbours think "deep" for the same
reason. His eyes had the far-seeing look of one who has lived long in open, solitary places; and
somehow I divined the network of wrinkles which must have surrounded them before re-birth had
washed him in immortality.
"I-I don't quite know," said I.
"Ye can sit and talk to me, then," he said, making room for me on the stone.
"I don't know you, Sir," said I, taking my seat beside him.
"My name is George," he answered. "George Macdonald."
"Oh!" I cried. "Then you can tell me! You at least will not deceive me." Then, supposing that these
expressions of confidence needed some explanation, I tried, trembling, to tell this man all that his
writings had done for me. I tried to tell how a certain frosty afternoon at Leatherhead Station when
I first bought a copy of Phantasies (being then about sixteen years old) had been to me what the
first sight of Beatrice had been to Dante: Here begins the New Life. I started to confess how long
that Life had delayed in the region of imagination merely: how slowly and reluctantly I had come
to admit that his Christendom had more than an accidental connexion with it, how hard I had tried
not to see that the true name of the quality which first met me in his books is Holiness. He laid his
hand on mine and stopped me.
"Son," he said, "your love-all love-is of inexpressible value to me. But it may save precious time"
(here he suddenly looked very Scotch) "if I inform ye that I am already well acquainted with these
biographical details. In fact, I have noticed that your memory misleads you in one or two
particulars."
"Oh!" said I, and became still.
"Ye had started," said my Teacher, "to talk of something more profitable."
"Sir," said I, "I had almost forgotten it, and I have no anxiety about the answer now, though I have
still a curiosity. It is about these Ghosts. Do any of them stay? Can they stay? Is any real choice
offered to them? How do they come to be here?"
"Did ye never hear of the Refrigerium? A man with your advantages might have read of it in
Prudentius, not to mention Jeremy Taylor."
"The name is familiar, Sir, but I'm afraid I've forgotten what it means."
"It means that the damned have holidays- excursions, ye understand."
"Excursions to this country?"
"For those that will take them. Of course most of the silly creatures don't. They prefer taking trips
back to Earth. They go and play tricks on the poor daft women ye call mediums. They go and try to
assert their ownership of some house that once belonged to them: and then ye get what's called a
Haunting. Or they go to spy on their children. Or literary Ghosts hang about public libraries to see
if anyone's still reading their books."
"But if they come here they can really stay?"
"Aye. Ye'll have heard that the emperor Trajan did."
"But I don't understand. Is judgment not final? Is there really a way out of Hell into Heaven?"
"It depends on the way you're using the words. If they leave that grey town behind it will not have
been Hell. To any that leaves it, it is Purgatory. And perhaps ye had better not call this country
Heaven. Not Deep Heaven, ye understand." (Here he smiled at me). "Ye can call it the Valley of
the Shadow of Life. And yet to those who stay here it will have been Heaven from the first. And ye
can call those sad streets in the town yonder the Valley of the Shadow of Death: but to those who
remain there they will have been Hell even from the beginning."
I suppose he saw that I looked puzzled, for presently he spoke again.
"Son," he said, "ye cannot in your present state understand eternity: when Anodos looked through
the door of the Timeless, he brought no message back. But ye can get some likeness of it if ye say
that both good and evil, when they are full grown, become retrospective. Not only this valley but all
this earthly past will have been Heaven to those who are saved. Not only the twilight in that town,
but all their life on earth too, will then be seen by the damned to have been Hell. That is what
mortals misunderstand. They say of some temporal suffering, 'No future bliss can make up for it,'
not knowing that Heaven, once attained, will work backwards and turn even that agony into a
glory. And of some sinful pleasure they say 'Let me but have this and I'll take the consequences':
little dreaming how damnation will spread back and back into their past and contaminate the
pleasure of the sin. Both processes begin even before death. The good man's past begins to change
so that hisforgiven sins and remembered sorrows take on the quality of Heaven: the bad man's past
already conforms to his badness and is filled only with dreariness. And that is why, at the end of all
things, when the sun rises here and the twilight turns to blackness down there, the Blessed will say,
'We have never lived anywhere except in Heaven,' and the Lost, 'We were always in Hell.' And
both will speak truly." "Is not that very hard, Sir?" "I mean, that is the real sense of what they will
say. In the actual language of the Lost, the words will be different, no doubt. One will say he has
always served his country right or wrong; and another that he has sacrificed everything to his Art;
and some that they've never been taken in, and some that, thank God, they've always looked after
Number One, and nearly all, that, at least they've been true to themselves." "And the Saved?"
"Ah, the Saved . . . what happens to them is best described as the opposite of a mirage. What
seemed, when they entered it, to be the vale of misery turns out, when they look back, to have been
a well; and where present experience saw only salt deserts memory truthfully records that the pools
were full of water."
"Then those people are right who say that Heaven and Hell are only states of mind?"
"Hush," said he sternly. "Do not blaspheme. Hell is a state of mind-ye never said a truer word. And
every state of mind, left to itself, every shutting up of the creature within the dungeon of its own
mind-is, in the end, Hell. But Heaven is not a state of mind. Heaven is reality itself. All that is fully
real is Heavenly. For all that can be shaken will be shaken and only the unshakable remains."
"But there is a real choice after death? My Roman Catholic friends would be surprised, for to them
souls in Purgatory are already saved. And my Protestant friends would like it no better, for they'd
say that the tree lies as it falls."
"They're both right, maybe. Do not fash yourself with such questions. Ye cannot fully understand
the relations of choice and Time till you are beyond both. And ye were not brought here to study
such curiosities. What concerns you is the nature of the choice itself: and that ye can watch them
making."
"Well, Sir," I said, "that also needs explaining. What do they choose, these souls who go back (I
have yet seen no others)? And how can they choose it?"
"Milton was right," said my Teacher. "The choice of every lost soul can be expressed in the words
'Better to reign in Hell than serve in Heaven.' There is always something they insist on keeping,
even at the price of misery. There is always something they prefer to joy- that is, to reality. Ye see
it easily enough in a spoiled child that would sooner miss its play and its supper than say it was
sorry and be friends. Ye call it the Sulks. But in adult life it has a hundred fine names-Achilles'
wrath and Coriolanus' grandeur, Revenge and Injured Merit and Self-Respect and Tragic Greatness
and Proper Pride."
"Then is no one lost through the undignified vices, Sir? Through mere sensuality?"
"Some are, no doubt. The sensualist, I'll allow ye, begins by pursuing a real pleasure, though a
small one. His sin is the less. But the time comes on when, though the pleasure becomes less and
less and the craving fiercer and fiercer, and though he knows that joy can never come that way, yet
he prefers to joy the mere fondling of unappeasable lust and would not have it taken from him. He'd
fight to the death to keep it. He'd like well to be able to scratch: but even when he can scratch no
more he'd rather itch than not."
He was silent for a few minutes, and then began again.
"Ye'll understand, there are innumerable forms of this choice. Sometimes forms that one hardly
thought of at all on earth. There was a creature came here not long ago and went back -Sir
Archibald they called him. In his earthly life he'd been interested in nothing but Survival. He'd
written a whole shelf-full of books about it. He began by being philosophical, but in the end he took
up Psychical Research. It grew to be his only occupation-experimenting, lecturing, running a
magazine. And travelling too: digging out queer stories among Thibetan
lamas and being initiated into brotherhoods in Central Africa. Proofs-and more proofs-and then
more proofs again-were what he wanted. It drove him mad if ever he saw anyone taking an interest
in anything else. He got into trouble during one of your wars for running up and down the country
telling them not to fight because it wasted a lot of money that ought to be spent on Research. Well,
in good time, the poor creature died and came here: and there was no power in the universe would
have prevented him staying and going on to the mountains. But do ye think that did him any good?
This country was no use to him at all. Everyone here had 'survived' already. Nobody took the least
interest in the question. There was nothing more to prove. His occupation was clean gone. Of
course if he would only have admitted that he'd mistaken the means for the end and had a good
laugh at himself he could have begun all over again like a little child and entered into joy. But he
would not do that. He cared nothing about joy. In the end he went away."
"How fantastic!" said I.
"Do ye think so?" said the Teacher with a piercing glance. "It is nearer to such as you than ye think.
There have been men before now who got so interested in proving the existence of God that they
came to care nothing for God Himself ... as if the good Lord had nothing to do but exist! There
have been some who were so occupied in spreading Christianity that they never gave a thought to
Christ. Man! Ye see it in smaller matters. Did ye never know a lover of books that with all his first
editions and signed copies had lost the power to read them? Or an organiser of charities that had
lost all love for the poor? It is the subtlest of all the snares."
Moved by a desire to change the subject, I asked why the Solid People, since they were full of love,
did not go down into Hell to rescue the Ghosts. Why were they content simply to meet them on the
plain? One would have expected a more militant charity.
"Ye will understand that better, perhaps, before ye go," said he. "In the meantime, I must tell ye
they have come further for the sake of the Ghosts than ye can understand. Every one of us lives
only to journey further and further into the mountains. Every one of us has interrupted that journey
and retraced immeasurable distances to come down today on the mere chance of saving some
Ghosts. Of course it is also joy to do so, but ye cannot blame us for that! And it would be no use to
come further even if it were possible. The sane would do no good if they made themselves mad to
help madmen."
"But what of the poor Ghosts who never get into the omnibus at all?"
"Everyone who wishes it does. Never fear. There are only two kinds of people in the end: those
who say to God, 'Thy will be done,' and those to whom God says, in the end, 'Thy will be done.' All
that are in Hell, choose it. Without that self-choice there could be no Hell. No soul that seriously
and constantly desires joy will ever miss it. Those who seek find. To those who knock it is opened."
At this moment we were suddenly interrupted by the thin voice of a Ghost talking at an enormous
speed. Looking behind us we saw the creature. It was addressing one of the Solid People and was
doing so too busily to notice us. Every now and then the Solid Spirit tried to get in a word but
without success. The Ghost's talk was like this:
"Oh, my dear, I've had such a dreadful time, I don't know how I ever got here at all, I was coming
with Elinor Stone and we'd arranged the whole thing and we were to meet at the corner of Sink
Street; I made it perfectly plain because I knew what she was like and if I told her once I told her a
hundred times I would not meet her outside that dreadful Marjori-banks woman's house, not after
the way she'd treated me ... that was one of the most dreadful things that happened to me; I've been
dying to tell you because I felt sure you'd tell me I acted rightly; no, wait a moment, dear, till I've
told you-I tried living with her when I first came and it was all fixed up, she was to do the cooking
and I was to look after the house and I did think I was going to be comfortable after all I'd been
through but she turned out to be so changed, absolutely selfish, and not a particle of sympathy for
anyone but herself-and as I once said to her 'I do think I'm entitled to a little consideration because
you at least lived out your time, but I oughtn't to have been here for years and years yet'-but of
course I'm forgetting you don't know-I was murdered, simply murdered, dear, that man
should never have operated, I ought to be alive to-day and they simply starved me in that dreadful
nursing home and no one ever came near me and . . ." The shrill monotonous whine died away as
the speaker, still accompanied by the bright patience at her side, moved out of hearing. "What
troubles ye, son?" asked my Teacher. "I am troubled, Sir," said I, "because that unhappy creature
doesn't seem to me to be the sort of soul that ought to be even in danger of damnation. She isn't
wicked: she's only a silly, garrulous old woman who has got into a habit of grumbling, and one
feels that a little kindness, and rest, and change would put her all right."
"That is what she once was. That is maybe what she still is. If so, she certainly will be cured. But
the whole question is whether she is now a grumbler."
"I should have thought there was no doubt about that!"
"Aye, but ye misunderstand me. The question is whether she is a grumbler, or only a grumble. If
there is a real woman-even the least trace of one-still there inside the grumbling, it can be brought
to life again. If there's one wee spark under all those ashes, we'll blow it till the whole pile is red
and clear. But if there's nothing but ashes we'll not go on blowing them in our own eyes forever.
They must be swept up."
"But how can there be a grumble without a grumbler?"
"The whole difficulty of understanding Hell is that the thing to be understood is so nearly Nothing.
But ye'll have had experiences . . . it begins with a grumbling mood, and yourself still distinct from
it: perhaps criticising it. And yourself, in a dark hour, may will that mood, embrace it. Ye can
repent and come out of it again. But there may come a day when you can do that no longer. Then
there will be no you left to criticise the mood, nor even to enjoy it, but just the grumble itself going
on forever like a machine. But come! Ye are here to watch and listen. Lean on my arm and we will
go for a little walk."
I obeyed. To lean on the arm of someone older than myself was an experience that carried me back
to childhood, and with this support I found the going tolerable: so much so, indeed, that I flattered
myself my feet were already growing more solid, until a glance at the poor transparent shapes
convinced me that I owed all this ease to the strong arm of the Teacher. Perhaps it was because of
his presence that my other senses also appeared to be quickened. I noticed scents in the air which
had hitherto escaped me, and the country put on new beauties. There was water everywhere and
tiny flowers quivering in the early breeze. Far off in the woods we saw the deer glancing past, and,
once a sleek panther came purring to my companion's side. We also saw many of the Ghosts.
I think the most pitiable was a female Ghost. Her trouble was the very opposite of that which
afflicted the other, the lady frightened by the Unicorns. This one seemed quite unaware of her
phantasmal appearance. More than one of the Solid People tried to talk to her, and at first I was
quite at a loss to understand her behaviour to them. She appeared to be contorting her all but
invisible face and writhing her smokelike body in a quite meaningless fashion. At last I came to the
conclusion-incredible as it seemed-that she supposed herself still capable of attracting them and
was trying to do so. She was a thing that had become incapable of conceiving conversation save as
a means to that end. If a corpse already liquid with decay had arisen from the coffin, smeared its
gums with lipstick, and attempted a flirtation, the result could not have been more appalling. In the
end she muttered "Stupid creatures," and turned back to the bus. This put me in mind to ask my
Teacher what he thought of the affair with the Unicorns. "It will maybe have succeeded," he said.
"Ye will have divined that he meant to frighten her; not that fear itself could make her less a Ghost,
but if it took her mind a moment off herself, there might, in that moment, be a chance. I have seen
them saved so."
We met several Ghosts that had come so near to Heaven only in order to tell the Celestials about
Hell. Indeed this is one of the commonest types. Others, who had perhaps been (like myself)
teachers of some kind actually wanted to give lectures about it: they brought fat notebooks full of
statistics, and maps, and (one of them) a magic lantern. Some wanted to tell anecdotes of the
notorious sinners of all ages whom they had met below. But the most part seemed to think that the
mere fact of having contrived for themselves so much misery gave them a kind of superiority. "You
have led a sheltered life!" they bawled. "You don't know the seamy side. We'll tell you. We'll give
you some hard facts"-as if to tinge Heaven with infernal images and colours had been the only
purpose for which they came. All alike, so far as I could judge from my own exploration of the
lower world, were wholly unreliable, and all equally incurious about the country in which they had
arrived. They repelled every attempt to teach them, and when they found that nobody listened to
them they went back, one by one, to the bus.
This curious wish to describe Hell turned out, however, to be only the mildest form of a desire very
common among the Ghosts-the desire to extend Hell, to bring it bodily, if they could, into Heaven.
There were tub-thumping Ghosts who in thin, batlike voices urged the blessed spirits to shake off
their fetters, to escape from their imprisonment in happiness, to tear down the mountains with their
hands, to seize Heaven "for their own": Hell offered her co-operation. There were planning Ghosts
who implored them to dam the river, cut down the trees, kill the animals, build a mountain railway,
smooth out the horrible grass and moss and heather with asphalt. There were materialistic Ghosts
who informed the immortals that they were deluded: there was no life after death, and this whole
country was a hallucination. There were Ghosts, plain and simple: mere bogies, fully conscious of
their own decay, who had accepted the traditional role of the spectre, and seemed to hope they
could frighten someone. I had had no idea that this desire was possible. But my Teacher reminded
me that the pleasure of frightening is by no means unknown on earth, and also of Tacitus' saying:
"They terrify lest they should fear." When the debris of a decayed human soul finds itself crumbled
into ghosthood and realises "I myself am now that which all humanity has feared, I am just that
cold churchyard shadow, that horrible thing which cannot be, yet somehow is," then to terrify
others appears to it an escape from the doom of being a Ghost yet still fearing Ghosts-fearing even
the Ghost it is. For to be afraid of oneself is the last horror.
But, beyond all these, I saw other grotesque phantoms in which hardly a trace of the human form
remained; monsters who had faced the journey to the bus stop-perhaps for them it was thousands of
miles-and come up to the country of the Shadow of Life and limped far into it over the torturing
grass, only to spit and gibber out in one ecstasy of hatred their envy and (what is harder to
understand) their contempt, of joy. The voyage seemed to them a small price to pay if once, only
once, within sight of that eternal dawn, they could tell the
prigs, the toffs, the sanctimonious humbugs, the snobs, the "haves," what they thought of them.
"How do they come to here at all?" I asked my Teacher.
"I have seen that kind converted," said he, "when those ye would think less deeply damned have
gone back. Those that hate goodness are sometimes nearer than those that know nothing at all about
it and think they have it already."
"Whisht, now!" said my Teacher suddenly. We were standing close to some bushes and beyond
them I saw one of the Solid People and a Ghost who had apparently just that moment met. The
outlines of the Ghost looked vaguely familiar, but I soon realized that what I had seen on earth was
not the man himself but photographs of him in the papers. He had been a famous artist.
"God!" said the Ghost, glancing round the landscape.
"God what?" asked the Spirit.
"What do you mean, 'God what'?" asked the Ghost.
"In our grammer God is a noun."
"Oh-I see. I only meant 'By Gum' or something of the sort. I meant . . . well, all this. It's . . . it's ... I
should like to paint this."
"I shouldn't bother about that just at present if I were you."
"Look here; isn't one going to be allowed to go on painting?"
"Looking comes first." "But I've had my look. I've seen just what I want to do. God!-I wish I'd
thought of bringing my things with me!"
The Spirit shook his head, scattering light from his hair as he did so. "That sort of thing's no good
here," he said.
"What do you mean?" said the Ghost.
"When you painted on earth-at least in your earlier days-it was because you caught glimpses of
Heaven in the earthly landscape. The success of your painting was that it enabled others to see the
glimpses too. But here you are having the thing itself. It is from here that the messages came. There
is no good telling us about this country, for we see it already. In fact we see it better than you do."
"Then there's never going to be any point in painting here?"
"I don't say that. When you've grown into a Person (it's all right, we all had to do it) there'll be some
things which you'll see better than anyone else. One of the things you'll want to do will be to tell us
about them. But not yet. At present your business is to see. Come and see. He is endless. Come and
feed."
There was a little pause. "That will be delightful," said the Ghost presently in a rather dull voice.
"Come, then," said the Spirit, offering it his arm.
"How soon do you think I could begin painting?" it asked.
The Spirit broke into laughter. "Don't you see you'll never paint at all if that's what you're thinking
about?" he said.
"What do you mean?" asked the Ghost.
"Why, if you are interested in the country only for the sake of painting it, you'll never learn to see
the country."
"But that's just how a real artist is interested in the country."
"No. You're forgetting," said the Spirit. "That was not how you began. Light itself was your first
love: you loved paint only as a means of telling about light."
"Oh, that's ages ago," said the Ghost. "One grows out of that. Of course, you haven't seen my later
works. One becomes more and more interested in paint for its own sake."
"One does, indeed. I also have had to recover from that. It was all a snare. Ink and catgut and paint
were necessary down there, but they are also dangerous stimulants. Every poet and musician and
artist, but for Grace, is drawn away from love of the thing he tells, to love of the telling till, down in
Deep Hell, they cannot be interested in God at all but only in what they say about Him. For it
doesn't stop at being interested in paint, you know. They sink lower-become interested in their own
personalities and then in nothing but their own reputations."
"I don't think I'm much troubled in that way," said the Ghost stiffly.
"That's excellent," said the Spirit. "Not many of us had quite got over it when we first arrived. But
if there is any of that inflammation left it will be cured when you come to the fountain."
"What fountain's that?"
"It is up there in the mountains," said the Spirit. "Very cold and clear, between two green hills. A
little like Lethe. When you have drunk of it you forget forever all proprietorship in your own
works. You enjoy them just as if they were someone else's: without pride and without modesty."
"That'll be grand," said the Ghost without enthusiasm.
"Well, come," said the Spirit: and for a few paces he supported the hobbling shadow forward to the
East.
"Of course," said the Ghost, as if speaking to itself, "there'll always be interesting people to meet. . .
."
"Everyone will be interesting."
"Oh-ah-yes, to be sure. I was thinking of people in our own line. Shall I meet Claude? Or Cezanne?
Or-----."
"Sooner or later-if they're here."
"But don't you know?"
"Well, of course not. I've only been here a few years. All the chances are against my having run
across them . . . there are a good many of us, you know."
"But surely in the case of distinguished people, you'd hear?"
"But they aren't distinguished-no more than anyone else. Don't you understand? The Glory flows
into everyone, and back from everyone: like light and mirrors. But the light's the thing."
"Do you mean there are no famous men?"
"They are all famous. They are all known, remembered, recognised by the only Mind that can give
a perfect judgment."
"Of, of course, in that sense . . ." said the Ghost.
"Don't stop," said the Spirit, making to lead him still forward.
"One must be content with one's reputation among posterity, then," said the Ghost.
"My friend," said the Spirit. "Don't you know?"
"Know what?"
"That you and I are already completely forgotten on the Earth?"
"Eh? What's that?" exclaimed the Ghost, disengaging its arm. "Do you mean those damned NeoRegionalists
have won after all?"
"Lord love you, yes!" said the Spirit, once more shaking and shining with laughter. "You couldn't
get five pounds for any picture of mine or even of yours in Europe or America to-day. We're dead
out of fashion."
"I must be off at once," said the Ghost. "Let me go! Damn it all, one has one's duty to the future of
Art. I must go back to my friends. I must write an article. There must be a manifesto. We must start
a periodical. We must have publicity. Let me go. This is beyond a joke!"
And without listening to the Spirit's reply, the spectre vanished.
10.
THIS CONVERSATION also we overheard.
"That is quite, quite out of the question," said a female Ghost to one of the bright Women, "I should
not dream of staying if I'm expected to meet Robert. I am ready to forgive him, of course. But
anything more is quite impossible. How he comes to be here . . . but that is your affair."
"But if you have forgiven him," said the other, "surely-----."
"I forgive him as a Christian," said the Ghost. "But there are some things one can never forget."
"But I don't understand ..." began the She-Spirit.
"Exactly," said the Ghost with a little laugh. "You never did. You always thought Robert could do
no wrong. I know. Please don't interrupt for one moment. You haven't the faintest conception of
what I went through with your dear Robert. The ingratitude! It was I who made a man of him!
Sacrificed my whole life to him! And what was my reward? Absolute, utter selfishness. No, but
listen. He was pottering along on about six hundred a year when I married him. And mark my
words, Hilda, he'd have been in that position to the day of his death if it hadn't been for me. It was I
who had to drive him every step of the way. He hadn't a spark of ambition. It was like trying to lift
a sack of coal. I had to positively nag him to take on that extra work in the other department,
though it was really the beginning of everything for him. The laziness of men! He said, if you
please, he couldn't work more than thirteen hours a day! As if I weren't working far longer. For my
day's work wasn't over when his was. I had to keep him going all evening, if you understand what I
mean. If he'd had his way he'd have just sat in an armchair and sulked when dinner was over. It was
I who had to draw him out of himself and brighten him up and make conversation. With no help
from him, of course. Sometimes he didn't even listen. AsI said to him, I should have thought good
manners, if nothing else ... he seemed to have forgotten that I was a lady even if I had married him,
and all the time I was working my fingers to the bone for him: and without the slightest
appreciation. I used to spend simply hours arranging flowers to make that poky little house nice,
and instead of thanking me, what do you think he said? Said he wished
I wouldn't fill up the writing desk with them when he wanted to use it: and there was a perfectly
frightful fuss one evening because I'd spilled one of the vases over some papers of his. It was all
nonsense really, because they weren't anything to do with his work. He had some silly idea of
writing a book in those days ... as if he could. I cured him of that in the end.
"No, Hilda, you must listen to me. The trouble I went to, entertaining! Robert's idea was that he'd
just slink off by himself every now and then to see what he called his old friends . . . and leave me
to amuse myself! But I knew from the first that those friends were doing him no good. 'No, Robert,'
said I, 'your friends are now mine. It is my duty to have them here, however tired I am and however
little we can afford it.' You'd have thought that would have been enough. But they did come for a
bit. That is where I had to use a certain amount of tact. A woman who has her wits about her can
always drop in a word here and there. I wanted Robert to see them against a different background.
They weren't quite at their ease, somehow, in my drawing-room: nor at their best. I couldn't help
laughing sometimes. Of course Robert was uncomfortable while the treatment was going on, but it
was all for his own good in the end. None of that set were friends of his any longer by the end of
the first year.
"And then, he got the new job. A great step up. But what do you think? Instead of realising that we
now had a chance to spread out a bit, all he said was 'Well now, for God's sake let's have some
peace.' That nearly finished me. I nearly gave him up altogether: but I knew my duty. I have always
done my duty. You can't believe the work I had getting him to agree to a bigger house, and then
finding a house. I wouldn't have grudged it one scrap if only he'd taken it in the right spirit-if only
he'd seen the fun of it all. If he'd been a different sort of man it would have been fun meeting him
on the doorstep as he came back from the office and saying, 'Come along, Bobs, no time for dinner
to-night. I've just heard of a house out near Watford and I've got the keys and we can get there and
back by one o'clock.' But with him! It was perfect misery, Hilda. For by this time your wonderful
Robert was turning into the sort of man who cares about nothing but food.
"Well, I got him into the new house at last. Yes, I know. It was a little more than we could really
afford at the moment, but all sorts of things were opening out before him. And, of course, I began
to entertain properly. No more of his sort of friends, thank you. I was doing it all for his sake. Every
useful friend he ever made was due to me. Naturally, I had to dress well. They ought to have been
the happiest years of both our lives. If they weren't, he had no one but himself to thank. Oh, he was
a maddening man, simply maddening! He just set himself to get old and silent and grumpy. Just
sank into himself. He could have looked years younger if he'd taken the trouble. He needn't have
walked with a stoop-I'm sure I warned him about that often enough. He was the most miserable
host. Whenever we gave a party everything rested on my shoulders: Robert was simply a wet
blanket. As I said to him (and if I said it once, I said it a hundred times) he hadn't always been like
that. There had been a time when he took an interest in all sorts of things and had been quite ready
to make friends. 'What on earth is coming over you?' I used to say. But now he just didn't answer at
all. He would sit staring at me with his great big eyes. (I came to hate a man with dark eyes) and-I
know it now-just hating me. That was my reward. After all I'd done. Sheer wicked, senseless
hatred: at the very moment when he was a richer man than he'd ever dreamed of being! As I used to
say to him, 'Robert, you're simply letting yourself go to seed.' The younger men who came to the
house-it wasn't my fault if they liked me better than rny old bear of a husband-used to laugh at him.
"I did my duty to the very end. I forced him to take exercise-that was really my chief reason for
keeping a great Dane. I kept on giving parties. I took him for the most wonderful holidays. I saw
that he didn't drink too much. Even, when things became desperate, I encouraged him to take up his
writing again. It couldn't do any harm by then. How could I help it if he did have a nervous
breakdown in the end? My conscience is clear. I've done my duty by him, if ever a woman has. So
you see why it would be impossible to ...
"And yet ... I don't know. I believe I have changed my mind. I'll make them a fair offer, Hilda. I
will not meet him, if it means just meeting him and no more. But if I'm given a free hand I'll take
charge of him again. I will take up my burden once more. But I must have a free hand. With all the
time one would have here, I believe I could make something of him. Somewhere quite to ourselves.
Wouldn't that be a good plan? He's not fit to be on his own. Put me in charge of him. He wants firm
handling. I know him better than you do. What's that? No, give him to me, do you hear? Don't
consult him: just give him to me. I'm his wife, aren't I? I was only beginning. There's lots, lots, lots
of things I still want to do with him. No, listen, Hilda. Please, please! I'm so miserable. I must have
someone to-to do things to. It's simply frightful down there. No one minds about me at all. I can't
alter them. It's dreadful to see them all sitting about and not be able to do anything with them. Give
him back to me. Why should he have everything his own way? It's no good for him. It isn't right,
it's not fair. I want Robert. What right have you to keep him from me? I hate you. How can I pay
him out if you won't let me have him?"
The Ghost which had towered up like a dying candleflame snapped suddenly. A sour, dry smell
lingered in the air for a moment and then there was no Ghost to be seen.
11.
ONE OF the most painful meetings we witnessed was between a woman's Ghost and a Bright Spirit
who had apparently been her brother. They must have met only a moment before we ran across
them, for the Ghost was just saying in a tone of unconcealed disappointment, "Oh ... Reginald! It's
you, is it?"
"Yes, dear," said the Spirit. "I know you expected someone else. Can you ... I hope you can be a
little glad to see even me; for the present."
"I did think Michael would have come," said the Ghost; and then, almost fiercely, "He is here, of
course?" "He's there-far up in the mountains."
"Why hasn't he come to meet me? Didn't he know?"
"My dear (don't worry, it will all come right presently) it wouldn't have done. Not yet. He wouldn't
be able to see or hear you as you are at present. You'd be totally invisible to Michael. But we'll
soon build you up."
"I should have thought if you can see me, my own son could!"
"It doesn't always happen like that. You see, I have specialised in this sort of work."
"Oh, it's work, is it?" snapped the Ghost. Then, after a pause, "Well. When am I going to be
allowed to see him?"
"There's no question of being allowed, Pam. As soon as it's possible for him to see you, of course
he will. You need to be thickened up a bit."
"How?" said the Ghost. The monosyllable was hard and a little threatening.
"I'm afraid the first step is a hard one," said the Spirit. "But after that you'll go on like a house on
fire. You will become solid enough for Michael to perceive you when you learn to want someone
else besides Michael. I don't say 'more than Michael,' not as a beginning. That will come later. It's
only the little germ of a desire for God that we need to start the process."
"Oh, you mean religion and all that sort of thing? This is hardly the moment... and from you, of all
people. Well, never mind. I'll do whatever's necessary. What do you want me to do? Come on. The
sooner I begin it, the sooner they'll let me see my boy. I'm quite ready."
"But, Pam, do think! Don't you see you are not beginning at all as long as you are in that state of
mind? You're treating God only as a means to Michael. But the whole thickening treatment consists
in learning to want God for His own sake."
"You wouldn't talk like that if you were a Mother."
"You mean, if I were only a mother. But there is no such thing as being only a mother. You exist as
Michael's mother only because you first exist as God's creature. That relation is older and closer.
No, listen, Pam! He also loves. He also has suffered. He also has waited a long time."
"If He loved me He'd let me see my boy. If He loved me why did He take away Michael from me? I
wasn't going to say anything about that. But it's pretty hard to forgive, you know."
"But He had to take Michael away. Partly for Michael's sake. . . ."
"I'm sure I did my best to make Michael happy. I gave up my whole life...."
"Human beings can't make one another really happy for long. And secondly, for your sake. He
wanted your merely instinctive love for your child (tigresses share that, you know!) to turn into
something better. He wanted you to love Michael as He understands love. You cannot love a
fellow-creature fully till you love God. Sometimes this conversion can be done while the instinctive
love is still gratified. But there was, it seems, no chance of that in your case. The instinct was
uncontrolled and fierce and monomaniac. (Ask your daughter, or your husband. Ask your own
mother. You haven't once thought of her.) The only remedy was to take away its object. It was a
case for surgery.
When that first kind of love was thwarted, then there was just a chance that in the loneliness, in the
silence, something else might begin to grow."
"This is all nonsense-cruel and wicked nonsense. What right have you to say things like that about
Mother-love? It is the highest and holiest feeling in human nature."
"Pam, Pam-no natural feelings are high or low, holy or unholy, in themselves. They are all holy
when God's hand is on the rein. They all go bad when they set up on their own and make
themselves into false gods."
"My love for Michael would never have gone bad. Not if we'd lived together for millions of years."
"You are mistaken. And you must know. Haven't you met-down there-mothers who have their sons
with them, in Hell? Does their love make them happy?"
"If you mean people like the Guthrie woman and her dreadful Bobby, of course not. I hope you're
not suggesting. ... If I had Michael I'd be perfectly happy, even in that town. I wouldn't be always
talking about him till everyone hated the sound of his name, which is what Winifred Guthrie does
about her brat. I wouldn't quarrel with people for not taking enough notice of him and then be
furiously jealous if they did. I wouldn't go about whining and complaining that he wasn't nice to
me. Because, of course, he would be nice. Don't you dare to suggest that Michael could ever
become like the Guthrie boy. There are some things I won't stand."
"What you have seen in the Guthries is what natural affection turns to in the end if it will not be
converted."
"It's a lie. A wicked, cruel lie. How could anyone love their son more than I did? Haven't I lived
only for his memory all these years?"
"That was rather a mistake, Pam. In your heart of hearts you know it was."
"What was a mistake?"
"All that ten years' ritual of grief. Keeping his room exactly as he'd left it: keeping anniversaries:
refusing to leave that house though Dick and Muriel were both wretched there."
"Of course they didn't care. I know that. I soon learned to expect no real sympathy from them."
"You're wrong. No man ever felt his son's death more than Dick. Not many girls loved their
brothers better than Muriel. It wasn't against Michael they revolted: it was against you-against
having their whole life dominated by the tyranny of the past: and not really even Michael's past, but
your past."
"You are heartless. Everyone is heartless. The past was all I had."
"It was all you chose to have. It was the wrong way to deal with a sorrow. It was Egyptian-like
embalming a dead body."
"Oh, of course. I'm wrong. Everything I say or do is wrong, according to you."
"But of course!" said the Spirit, shining with love and mirth so that my eyes were dazzled.
"That's what we all find when we reach this country. We've all been wrong! That's the great joke.
There's no need to go on pretending one was right! After that we begin living."
"How dare you laugh about it? Give me my boy. Do you hear? I don't care about all your rules and
regulations. I don't believe in a God who keeps mother and son apart. I believe in a God of Love.
No one has a right to come between me and my son. Not even God. Tell Him that to His face. I
want my boy, and I mean to have him. He is mine, do you understand? Mine, mine, mine, for ever
and ever."
"He will be, Pam. Everything will be yours. God himself will be yours. But not that way. Nothing
can be yours by nature."
"What? Not my own son, born out of my own body?"
"And where is your own body now? Didn't you know that Nature draws to an end? Look! The sun
is coming, over the mountains there: it will be up any moment now."
"Michael is mine."
"How yours? You didn't make him. Nature made him to grow in your body without your will. Even
against your will . . . you sometimes forget that you didn't intend to have a baby then at all. Michael
was originally an Accident."
"Who told you that?" said the Ghost: and then, recovering itself, "It's a lie. It's not true. And it's no
business of yours. I hate your religion and I hate and despise your God. I believe in a God of Love."
"And yet, Pam, you have no love at this moment for your own mother or for me."
"Oh, I see! That's the trouble, is it? Really, Reginald! The idea of your being hurt because . . ."
"Lord love you!" said the Spirit with a great laugh. "You needn't bother about that! Don't you know
that you can't hurt anyone in this country?"
The Ghost was silent and open-mouthed for a moment; more wilted, I thought, by this reassurance
than by anything else that had been said.
"Come. We will go a bit further," said my Teacher, laying his hand on my arm.
"Why did you bring me away, Sir?" said I when we had passed out of earshot of this unhappy
Ghost.
"It might take a long while, that conversation," said my Teacher. "And ye have heard enough to see
what the choice is." "Is there any hope for her, Sir?" "Aye, there's some. What she calls her love for
her son has turned into a poor, prickly, astringent sort of thing. But there's still a wee spark of
something that's not just her self in it. That might be blown into a flame."
"Then some natural feelings are really better than others-I mean, are a better starting-point for the
real thing?"
"Better and worse. There's something in natural affection which will lead it on to eternal love more
easily than natural appetite could be led on. But there's also something in it which makes it easier to
stop at the natural level and mistake it for the heavenly. Brass is mistaken for gold more easily than
clay is. And if it finally refuses conversion its corruption will be worse than the corruption of what
ye call the lower passions. It is a stronger angel, and therefore, when it falls, a fiercer devil."
"I don't know that I dare repeat this on Earth, Sir," said I. "They'd say I was inhuman: they'd say I
believed in total depravity: they'd say I was attacking the best and the holiest things. Thev'd call me
. . ."
"It might do you no harm if they did," said he with (I reallv thought) a twinkle in his eye.
"But could one dare-could one have the face-to go to a bereaved mother, in her misery -when one's
not bereaved oneself? . . ."
"No, no. Son, that's no office of yours. You're not a good enough man for that. When your own
heart's been broken it will be time for you to think of talking. But someone must say in general
what's been unsaid among you this many a vear: that love, as mortals understand the word, isn't
enough. Every natural love will rise again and live forever in this country: but none will rise again
until it has been buried."
"The saying is almost too hard for us."
"Ah, but it's cruel not to say it. They that know have grown afraid to speak. That is why sorrows
that used to purify now only fester."
"Keats was wrong, then, when he said he was certain of the holiness of the heart's affections."
"I dovibt if he knew clearly what he meant. But you and I must be clear. There is but one good; that
is God. Everything else is good when it looks to Him and bad when it turns from Him. And the
higher and mightier it is in the natural order, the more demoniac it will be if it rebels. It's not out of
bad mice or bad fleas you make demons, but out of bad archangels. The false religion of lust is
baser than the false religion of mother-love or patriotism or art: but lust is less likely to be made
into a religion. But look!"
I saw coming towards us a Ghost who carried something on his shoulder. Like all the Ghosts, he
was unsubstantial, but they differed from one another as smokes differ. Some had been whitish; this
one was dark and oily. What sat on his shoulder was a little red lizard, and it was twitching its tail
like a whip and whispering things in his ear. As we caught sight of him he turned his head to the
reptile with a snarl of impatience. "Shut up, I tell you!" he said. It wagged its tail and continued to
whisper to him. He ceased snarling, and presently began to smile. Then he turned and started to
limp westward, away from the mountains.
"Off so soon?" said a voice.
The speaker was more or less human in shape but larger than a man, and so bright that I could
hardly look at him. His presence smote on my eyes and on my body too (for there was heat coming
from him as well as light) like the morning sun at the beginning of a tyrannous summer day.
"Yes. I'm off," said the Ghost. "Thanks for all your hospitality. But it's no good, you see.
I told this little chap," (here he indicated the lizard), "that he'd have to be quiet if he came -which he
insisted on doing. Of course his stuff won't do here: I realise that. But he won't stop. I shall just
have to go home."
"Would you like me to make him quiet?" said the flaming Spirit-an angel, as I now understood.
"Of course I would," said the Ghost.
"Then I will kill him," said the Angel, taking a step forward.
"Oh-ah-look out! You're burning me. Keep away," said the Ghost, retreating.
"Don't you want him killed?"
"You didn't say anything about killing him at first. I hardlv meant to bother you with anything so
drastic as that."
"It's the onlv way," said the Angel, whose burning hands were now very close to the lizard. "Shall I
kill it?"
"Well, that's a further question. I'm quite open to consider it, but it's a new point, isn't it? I mean,
for the moment I was only thinking about silencing it because up here-well, it's so damned
embarrassing."
"May I kill it?"
"Well, there's time to discuss that later."
"There is no time. May I kill it?"
"Please, I never meant to be such a nuisance. Please-really-don't bother. Look! It's gone to sleep of
its own accord. I'm sure it'll be all right now. Thanks ever so much."
"May I kill it?"
"Honestly, I don't think there's the slightest necessity for that. I'm sure I shall be able to keep it in
order now. I think the gradual process would be far better than killing it."
"The gradual process is of no use at all."
"Don't you think so? Well, I'll think over what you've said very carefully. I honestly will. In fact I'd
let you kill it now, but as a matter of fact I'm not feeling frightfully well to-day. It would be silly to
do it now. I'd need to be in good health for the operation. Some other day, perhaps."
"There is no other day. All days are present now."
"Get back! You're burning me. How can I tell you to kill it? You'd kill me if you did."
"It is not so."
"Why, you're hurting me now."
"I never said it wouldn't hurt you. I said it wouldn't kill you."
"Oh, I know. You think I'm a coward. But it isn't that. Really it isn't. I say! Let me run back by
tonight's bus and get an opinion from my own doctor. I'll come again the first moment I can."
"This moment contains all moments."
"Why are you torturing me? You are jeering at me. How can I let you tear me to pieces? If you
wanted to help me, why didn't you kill the damned thing without asking me-before I knew? It
would be all over by now if you had."
"I cannot kill it against your will. It is impossible. Have I your permission?"
The Angel's hands were almost closed on the Lizard, but not quite. Then the Lizard began
chattering to the Ghost so loud that even I could hear what it was saying.
"Be careful," it said. "He can do what he says. He can kill me. One fatal word from you and he
will! Then you'll be without me for ever and ever. It's not natural. How could you live? You'd be
only a sort of ghost, not a real man as you are now. He doesn't understand. He's only a cold,
bloodless abstract thing. It may be natural for him, but it isn't for us. Yes, yes. I know there are no
real pleasures now, only dreams. But aren't they better than nothing? And I'll be so good. I admit
I've sometimes gone too far in the past, but I promise I won't do it again. I'll give you nothing but
really nice dreams-all sweet and fresh and almost innocent. You might say, quite innocent____"
"Have I your permission?" said the Angel to the Ghost.
"I know it will kill me."
"It won't. But supposing it did?"
"You're right. It would be better to be dead than to live with this creature."
"Then I may?"
"Damn and blast you! Go on can't you? Get it over. Do what you like," bellowed the Ghost: but
ended, whimpering, "God help me. God help me."
Next moment the Ghost gave a scream of agony such as I never heard on Earth. The Burning One
closed his crimson grip on the reptile: twisted it, while it bit and writhed, and then flung it, broken
backed, on the turf.
"Ow! That's done for me," gasped the Ghost, reeling backwards.
For a moment I could make out nothing distinctly. Then I saw, between me and the nearest bush,
unmistakably solid but growing every moment solider, the upper arm and the shoulder of a man.
Then, brighter still and stronger, the legs and hands. The neck and golden head materialised while I
watched, and if my attention had not wavered I should have seen the actual completing of a man-an
immense man, naked, not much smaller than the Angel. What distracted me was the fact that at the
same moment something seemed to be happening to the Lizard. At first I thought the operation had
failed. So far from dying, the creature was still struggling and even growing bigger as it struggled.
And as it grew it changed. Its hinder parts grew rounder. The tail, still flickering, became a tail of
hair that flickered between huge and glossy buttocks. Suddenly I started back, rubbing my eyes.
What stood before me was the greatest stallion I have ever seen, silvery white but with mane and
tail of gold. It was smooth and shining, rippled with swells of flesh and muscle, whinneying and
stamping with its hoofs. At each stamp the land shook and the trees dindled.
The new-made man turned and clapped the new horse's neck. It nosed his bright body. Horse and
master breathed each into the other's nostrils. The man turned from it, flung himself at the feet of
the Burning One, and embraced them. When he rose I thought his face shone with tears, but it may
have been only the liquid love and brightness (one cannot distinguish them in that country) which
flowed from him. I had not long to think about it. In joyous haste the young man leaped upon the
horse's back. Turning in his seat he waved a farewell, then nudged the stallion with his heels. They
were off before I well knew what was happening. There was riding if you like! I came out as
quickly as I could from among the bushes to follow them with my eyes; but already they were only
like a shooting star far off on the green plain, and soon among the foothills of the mountains. Then,
still like a star, I saw them winding up, scaling what seemed impossible steeps, and quicker every
moment, till near the dim brow of the landscape, so high that I must strain my neck to see them,
they vanished, bright themselves, into the rose-brightness of that everlasting morning.
While I still watched, I noticed that the whole plain and forest were shaking with a sound which in
our world would be too large to hear, but there I could take it with joy. I knew it was not the Solid
People who were singing. It was the voice of that earth, those woods and those waters. A strange
archaic, inorganic noise, that came from all directions at once. The Nature or Arch-nature of that
land rejoiced to have been once more ridden, and therefore consummated, in the person of the
horse. It sang,
"The Master says to our master, Come up. Share my rest and splendour till all natures that were
your enemies become slaves to dance before you and backs for you to ride, and firmness for your
feet to rest on.
"From beyond all place and time, out of the very Place, authority will be given you: the strengths
that once opposed your will shall be obedient fire in your blood and heavenly thunder in your
voice.
"Overcome us that, so overcome, we may be ourselves: we desire the beginning of your reign as we
desire dawn and dew, wetness at the birth of light.
"Master, your Master has appointed you for ever: to be our King of Justice and our high Priest."
"Do ye understand all this, my Son?" said the Teacher.
"I don't know about all, Sir," said I. "Am I right in thinking the Lizard really turned into the
Horse?"
"Aye. But it was killed first. Ye'll not forget that part of the story?"
"I'll try not to, Sir. But does it mean that everything-everything-that is in us can go on to the
Mountains?"
"Nothing, not even the best and noblest, can go on as it now is. Nothing, not even what is lowest
and most bestial, will not be raised again if it submits to death. It is sown a natural body, it is raised
a spiritual body. Flesh and blood cannot come to the Mountains. Not because they are too rank, but
because they are too weak. What is a Lizard compared with a stallion? Lust is a poor, weak,
whimpering whispering thing compared with that richness and energy of desire which will arise
when lust has been killed."
"But am I to tell them at home that this man's sensuality proved less of an obstacle than that poor
woman's love for her son? For that was, at any rate, an excess of love."
"Ye'll tell them no such thing," he replied sternly. "Excess of love, did ye say? There was no
excess, there was defect. She loved her son too little, not too much. If she had loved him more
there'd be no difficulty. I do not know how her affair will end. But it may well be that at this
moment she's demanding to have him down with her in Hell. That kind is sometimes perfectly
ready to plunge the soul they say they love in endless misery if only they can still in some fashion
possess it. No, no. Ye must draw another lesson. Ye must ask, if the risen body even of appetite is
as grand a horse as ye saw, what would the risen body of maternal love or friendship be?"
But once more my attention was diverted. "Is there another river, Sir?" I asked.
12.
THE REASON why I asked if there were another river was this. All down one long aisle of the
forest the under-sides of the leafy branches had begun to tremble with dancing light; and on earth I
knew nothing so likely to produce this appearance as the reflected lights cast upward by moving
water. A few moments later I realised my mistake. Some kind of procession was approaching us,
and the light came from the persons who composed it.
First came bright Spirits, not the Spirits of men, who danced and scattered flowers-soundlessly
falling, lightly drifting flowers, though by the standards of the ghost-world each petal would have
weighed a hundred-weight and their fall would have been like the crashing of boulders. Then, on
the left and right, at each side of the forest avenue, came youthful shapes, boys upon one hand, and
girls upon the other. If I could remember their singing and write down the notes, no man who read
that score would ever grow sick or old. Between them went musicians: and after these a lady in
whose honour all this was being done.
I cannot now remember whether she was naked or clothed. If she were naked, then it must have
been the almost visible penumbra of her courtesy and joy which produces in my memory the
illusion of a great and shining train that followed her across the happy grass. If she were clothed,
then the illusion of nakedness is doubtless due to the clarity with which her inmost spirit shone
through the clothes. For clothes in that country are not a disguise: the spiritual body lives along
each thread and turns them into living organs. A robe or a crown is there as much one of the
wearer's features as a lip or an eye.
But I have forgotten. And only partly do I remember the unbearable beauty of her face.
"Is it? ... is it?" I whispered to my guide.
"Not at all," said he. "It's someone ye'll never have heard of. Her name on earth was Sarah Smith
and she lived at Golders Green."
"She seems to be ... well, a person of particular importance?"
"Aye. She is one of the great ones. Ye have heard that fame in this country and fame on Earth are
two quite different things."
"And who are these gigantic people . . . look! They're like emeralds . . . who are dancing and
throwing flowers before her?"
"Haven't ye read your Milton? A thousand livened angels lackey her,"
"And who are all these young men and women on each side?"
"They are her sons and daughters." "She must have had a very large family, Sir." "Every young
man or boy that met her became her son-even if it was only the boy that brought the meat to her
back door. Every girl that met her was her daughter."
"Isn't that a bit hard on their own parents?" "No. There are those that steal other people's children.
But her motherhood was of a different kind. Those on whom it fell went back to their natural
parents loving them more. Few men looked on her without becoming, in a certain fashion, her
lovers. But it was the kind of love that made them not less true, but truer, to their own wives."
"And how ... but hullo! What are all these animals? A cat-two cats-dozens of cats. And all those
dogs . . . why, I can't count them. And the birds. And the horses." "They are her beasts." "Did she
keep a sort of zoo? I mean, this is a bit too much."
"Every beast and bird that came near her had its place in her love. In her they became themselves.
And now the abundance of life she has in Christ from the Father flows over into them." I looked at
my Teacher in amazement. "Yes," he said. "It is like when you throw a stone into a pool, and the
concentric waves spread out further and further. Who knows where it will end? Redeemed
humanity is still young, it has hardly come to its full strength.
But already there is joy enough in the little finger of a great saint such as yonder lady to waken all
the dead things of the universe into life."
While we spoke the Lady was steadily advancing towards us, but it was not at us she looked.
Following the direction of her eyes, I turned and saw an oddly-shaped phantom approaching. Or
rather two phantoms: a great tall Ghost, horribly thin and shaky, who seemed to be leading on a
chain another Ghost no bigger than an organ-grinder's monkey. The taller Ghost wore a soft black
hat, and he reminded me of something that my memory could not quite recover. Then, when he had
come within a few feet of the Lady he spread out his lean, shaky hand flat on his chest with the
fingers wide apart, and exclaimed in a hollow voice, "At last!" All at once I realised what it was
that he had put me in mind of. He was like a seedy actor of the old school.
"Darling! At last!" said the Lady. "Good
Heavens!" thought I. "Surely she can't-----,"
and then I noticed two things. In the first place, I noticed that the little Ghost was not being led by
the big one. It was the dwarfish figure that held the chain in its hand and the theatrical figure that
wore the collar round its neck. In the second place, I noticed that the Lady was looking solely at the
dwarf Ghost. She seemed to think it was the Dwarf who had addressed her, or else she was
deliberately ignoring the other. On the poor dwarf she turned her eyes. Love shone not from her
face only, but from all her limbs, as if it were some liquid in which she had just been bathing. Then,
to my dismay she came nearer. She stooped down and kissed the Dwarf. It made one shudder to see
her in such close contact with that cold, damp, shrunken thing. But she did not shudder.
"Frank," she said, "before anything else, forgive me. For all I ever did wrong and for all I did not do
rightsince the first day we met, I ask your pardon."
I looked properly at the Dwarf for the first time now: or perhaps, when he received her kiss he
became a little more visible. One could just make out the sort of face he must have had when he
was a man: a little, oval, freckled face with a weak chin and a tiny wisp of unsuccessful moustache.
He gave her a glance, not a full look. He was watching the Tragedian out of the corner of his eyes.
Then he gave a jerk to the chain: and it was the Tragedian, not he, who answered the Lady.
"There, there," said the Tragedian. "We'll say no more about it. We all make mistakes." With the
words there came over his features a ghastly contortion which, I think, was meant for an
indulgentlv plavful smile. "We'll say no more," he continued. "It's not myself I'm thinking about. It
is you. That is what has been continually on my mind-all these vears. The thought of you-you here
alone, breaking your heart about me."
"But now," said the Lady to the Dwarf, "you can set all that aside. Never think like that again. It is
all over."
Her beauty brightened so that I could hardly see anything else, and under that sweet compulsion the
Dwarf really looked at her for the first time. For a second I thought he was growing more like a
man. He opened his mouth. He himself was going to speak this time. But oh, the disappointment
when the words came!
"You missed me?" he croaked in a small, bleating voice.
Yet even then she was not taken aback. Still the love and courtesy flowed from her.
"Dear, you will understand about that very soon," she said. "But to-day-----."
What happened next gave me a shock. The Dwarf and the Tragedian spoke in unison, not to her but
to one another. "You'll notice," they warned one another, "she hasn't answered our question." I
realised then that they were one person, or rather that both were the remains of what had once been
a person. The Dwarf again rattled the chain.
"You missed me?" said the Tragedian to the Lady, throwing a dreadful theatrical tremor into his
voice.
"Dear friend," said the Lady, still attending exclusively to the Dwarf, "you may be happy about that
and about everything else. Forget all about it for ever."
And really, for a moment, I thought the Dwarf was going to obey: partly because the outlines of his
face became a little clearer, and partly because the invitation to all joy, singing out of her whole
being like a bird's song on an April evening, seemed to me such that no creature could resist it.
Then he hesitated. And then-once more he and his accomplice spoke in unison.
"Of course it would be rather fine and magnanimous not to press the point," they said to one
another. "But can we be sure she'd notice? We've done these sort of things before. There was the
time we let her have the last stamp in the house to write to her mother and said nothing although
she had known we wanted to write a letter ourself. We'd thought she'd remember and see how
unselfish we'd been. But she never did. And there was the time . . . oh, lots and lots of times!" So
the Dwarf gave a shake to the chain and-----.
"I can't forget it," cried the Tragedian. "And I won't forget it, either. I could forgive them all they've
done to me. But for your miseries-----."
"Oh, don't you understand?" said the Lady. "There are no miseries here."
"Do you mean to say," answered the Dwarf, as if this new idea had made him quite forget the
Tragedian for a moment, "do you mean to say you've been happy?"
"Didn't you want me to be? But no matter. Want it now. Or don't think about it at all."
The Dwarf blinked at her. One could see an unheard-of idea trying to enter his little mind: one
could see even that there was for him some sweetness in it. For a second he had almost let the chain
go: then, as if it were his life-line, he clutched it once more.
"Look here," said the Tragedian. "We've got to face this." He was using his "manly" bullying tone
this time: the one for bringing women to their senses.
"Darling," said the Lady to the Dwarf, "there's nothing to face. You don't want me to have been
miserable for misery's sake. You only think I must have been if I loved you. But if you'll only wait
you'll see that isn't so."
"Love!" said the Tragedian striking his forehead with his hand: then, a few notes deeper, "Love! Do
you know the meaning of the word?"
"How should I not?" said the Lady. "I am in love. In love, do you understand? Yes, now I love
truly."
"You mean," said the Tragedian, "you mean -you did not love me truly in the old days?"
"Only in a poor sort of way," she answered. "I have asked you to forgive me. There was a little real
love in it. But what we called love down there was mostly the craving to be loved. In the main I
loved you for my own sake: because I needed you."
"And now!" said the Tragedian with a hackneyed gesture of despair. "Now, you need me no more?"
"But of course not!" said the Lady; and her smile made me wonder how both the phantoms could
refrain from crying out with joy.
"What needs could I have," she said, "now that I have all? I am full now, not empty. I am in Love
Himself, not lonely. Strong, not weak. You shall be the same. Come and see. We shall have no
need for one another now: we can begin to love truly."
But the Tragedian was still striking attitudes.
"She needs me no more-no more. No more/' he said in a choking voice to no one in particular.
"Would to God," he continued, but he was now pronouncing it Gud-"Would to God I had seen her
lying dead at my feet before I heard those words. Lying dead at my feet. Lying dead at my feet."
I do not know how long the creature intended to go on repeating the phrase, for the Lady put an end
to that. "Frank! Frank!" she cried in a voice that made the whole wood ring. "Look at me. Look at
me. What are you doing with that great, ugly doll? Let go of the chain. Send it away. It is you I
want. Don't you see what nonsense it's talking?" Merriment danced in her eyes. She was sharing a
joke with the Dwarf, right over the head of the Tragedian. Something not at all unlike a smile
struggled to appear on the Dwarf's face. For he was looking at her now. Her laughter was past his
first defences. He was struggling hard to keep it out, but already with imperfect success. Against
his will, he was even growing a little bigger. "Oh, you great goose," said she. "What is the good of
talking like that here? You know as well as I do that you did see me lying dead years and years ago.
Not 'at your feet,' of course, but on a bed in a nursing home. A very good nursing home it was too.
Matron would never have dreamed of leaving bodies lying about the floor! It's ridiculous for that
doll to try to be impressive about death here. It just won't work."
13.
I DO not know that I ever saw anything more terrible than the struggle of that Dwarf Ghost against
joy. For he had almost been overcome. Somewhere, incalculable ages ago, there must have been
gleams of humour and reason in him. For one moment, while she looked at him in her love and
mirth, he saw the absurdity of the Tragedian. For one moment he did not at all misunderstand her
laughter: he too must once have known that no people find each other more absurd than lovers. But
the light that reached him, reached him against his will. This was not the meeting he had pictured;
he would not accept it. Once more he clutched at his death-line, and at once the Tragedian spoke.
"You dare to laugh at it!" it stormed. "To my face? And this is my reward. Very well. It is fortunate
that you give yourself no concern about my fate. Otherwise you might be sorry afterwards to think
that you had driven me back to Hell. What? Do you think I'd stay now? Thank you. I believe I'm
fairly quick at recognising where I'm not wanted. 'Not needed' was the exact expression, if I
remember rightly."
From this time on the Dwarf never spoke again: but still the Lady addressed it.
"Dear, no one sends you back. Here is all joy. Everything bids you stay." But the Dwarf was
growing smaller even while she spoke.
"Yes," said the Tragedian. "On terms you might offer to a dog. I happen to have some self-respect
left, and I see that my going will make no difference to you. It is nothing to you that I go back to
the cold and the gloom, the lonely, lonely streets-----."
"Don't, don't Frank," said the Lady. "Don't let it talk like that." But the Dwarf was now so small
that she had dropped on her knees to speak to it. The Tragedian caught her words greedily as a dog
catches a bone.
"Ah, you can't bear to hear it!" he shouted with miserable triumph. "That was always the way. You
must be sheltered. Grim realities must be kept out of your sight. You who can be happy without
me, forgetting me! You don't want even to hear of my sufferings. You say, don't. Don't tell you.
Don't make you unhappy. Don't break in on your sheltered, self-centred little heaven. And this is
the reward-----."
She stooped still lower to speak to the Dwarf which was now a figure no bigger than a kitten,
hanging on to the end of the chain with his feet off the ground.
"That wasn't why I said, Don't," she answered. "I meant, stop acting. It's no good. He is killing you.
Let go of that chain. Even now."
"Acting," screamed the Tragedian. "What do you mean?"
The Dwarf was now so small that I could not distinguish him from the chain to which he was
clinging. And now for the first time I could not be certain whether the Lady was addressing him or
the Tragedian.
"Quick," she said. "There is still time. Stop it. Stop it at once."
"Stop what?"
"Using pity, other people's pity, in the wrong way. We have all done it a bit on earth, you know.
Pity was meant to be a spur that drives joy to help misery. But it can be used the wrong way round.
It can be used for a kind of blackmailing. Those who choose misery can hold joy up to ransom, by
pity. You see, I know now. Even as a child you did it. Instead of saying you were sorry, you went
and sulked in the attic . . . because vou knew that sooner or later one of your sisters would say, 'I
can't bear to think of him sitting up there alone, crying.' You used your pity to blackmail them, and
they gave in in the end. And afterwards, when we were married . . . oh, it doesn't matter, if only you
will stop it."
"And that," said the Tragedian, "that is all you have understood of me, after all these years." I don't
know what had become of the Dwarf Ghost by now. Perhaps it was climbing up the chain like an
insect: perhaps it was somehow absorbed into the chain.
"No, Frank, not here," said the Lady. "Listen to reason. Did you think joy was created to live
always under that threat? Always defenceless against those who would rather be miserable than
have their self-will crossed? For it was real misery. I know that now. You made yourself really
wretched. That you can still do. But you can no longer communicate your wretchedness.
Everything becomes more and more itself. Here is joy that cannot be shaken. Our light can swallow
up your darkness: but your darkness cannot now infect our light. No, no, no. Come to us. We will
not go to you. Can you really have thought that love and joy would always be at the mercy of
frowns and sighs? Did you not know they were stronger than their opposites?"
"Love? How dare you use that sacred word?" said the Tragedian. At the same moment he gathered
up the chain which had now for some time been swinging uselessly at his side, and somehow
disposed of it. I am not quite sure, but I think he swallowed it. Then for the first time it became
clear that the Lady saw and addressed him only.
"Where is Frank?" she said. "And who are you, Sir? I never knew you. Perhaps you had better
leave me. Or stay, if you prefer. If it would help you and if it were possible I would go down with
you into Hell: but you cannot bring Hell into me."
"You do not love me," said the Tragedian in a thin bat-like voice: and he was now very difficult to
see.
"I cannot love a lie," said the Lady. "I cannot love the thing which is not. I am in Love, and out of it
I will not go."
There was no answer. The Tragedian had vanished. The Lady was alone in that woodland place,
and a brown bird went hopping past her, bending with its light feet the grasses I could not bend.
Presently the Lady got up and began to walk away. The other Bright Spirits came forward to
receive her, singing as they came:
"The Happy Trinity is her home: nothing can
trouble her joy.
She is the bird that evades every net: the wild
deer that leaps every pitfall.
Like the mother bird to its chickens or a shield
to the arm'd knight: so is the Lord to her
mind, in His unchanging lucidity.
Bogies will not scare her in the dark: bullets will
not frighten her in the day.
Falsehoods tricked out as truths assail her in
vain: she sees through the lie as if it were
glass.
The invisible germ will not harm her: nor yet
the glittering sun-stroke.
A thousand fail to solve the problem, ten thousand
choose the wrong turning: but she
passes safely through.
He details immortal gods to attend her: upon
every road where she must travel.
They take her hand at hard places: she will not
stub her toes in the dark.
She may walk among Lions and rattlesnakes:
among dinosaurs and nurseries of lionets.
He fills her brim full with immensity of life:
he leads her to see the world's desire."
"And yet . . . and yet ... ," said I to my Teacher, when all the shapes and the singing had passed
some distance away into the forest, "even now I am not quite sure. Is it really tolerable that she
should be untouched by his misery, even his self-made misery?"
"Would ye rather he still had the power of tormenting her? He did it many a day and many a year in
their earthly life."
"Well, no. I suppose I don't want that."
"What then?"
"I hardly know, Sir. What some people say on earth is that the final loss of one soul gives the lie to
all the joy of those who are saved."
"Ye see it does not."
"I feel in a way that it ought to."
"That sounds very merciful: but see what lurks behind it."
"What?"
"The demand of the loveless and the self-imprisoned that they should be allowed to blackmail the
universe: that till they consent to be happy (on their own terms) no one else shall taste joy: that
theirs should be the final power; that Hell should be able to veto Heaven."
"I don't know what I want, Sir."
"Son, son, it must be one way or the other. Either the day must come when joy prevails and all the
makers of misery are no longer able to infect it: or else for ever and ever the makers of misery can
destroy in others the happiness they reject for themselves. I know it has a grand sound to say ye'll
accept no salvation which leaves even one creature in the dark outside. But watch that sophistry or
ye'll make a Dog in a Manger the tyrant of the universe."
"But dare one say-it is horrible to say-that Pity must ever die?"
"Ye must distinguish. The action of Pity will live for ever: but the passion of Pity will not. The
passion of pity, the pity we merely suffer, the ache that draws men to concede what should not be
conceded and to flatter when they should speak truth, the pity that has cheated many a woman out
of her virginity and many a statesman out of his honesty-that will die. It was used as a weapon by
bad men against good ones: their weapon will be broken."
"And what is the other kind-the action?"
"It's a weapon on the other side. It leaps quicker than light from the highest place to the lowest to
bring healing and joy, whatever the cost to itself. It changes darkness into light and evil into good.
But it will not, at the cunning tears of Hell, impose on good the tyranny of evil. Every disease that
submits to a cure shall be cured: but we will not call blue yellow to please those who insist on still
having jaundice, nor make a midden of the world's garden for the sake of some who cannot abide
the smell of roses."
"You say it will go down to the lowest, Sir. But she didn't go down with him to Hell. She didn't
even see him off by the bus."
"Where would ye have had her go?"
"Why, where we all came from by that bus. The big gulf, beyond the edge of the cliff. Over there.
You can't see it from here, but you must know the place I mean."
My Teacher gave a curious smile. "Look," he said, and with the word he went down on his hands
and knees. I did the same (how it hurt my knees!) and presently saw that he had plucked a blade of
grass. Using its thin end as a pointer, he made me see, after I had looked very closely, a crack in the
soil so small that I could not have identified it without this aid.
"I cannot be certain," he said, "that this is the crack ye came up through. But through a crack no
bigger than that ye certainly came."
"But-but," I gasped with a feeling of bewilderment not unlike terror. "I saw an infinite abyss. And
cliffs towering up and up. And then this country on top of the cliffs."
"Aye. But the voyage was not mere locomotion. That bus, and all you inside it, were increasing in
size."
"Do you mean then that Hell-all that infinite empty town-is down in some little crack like this?"
"Yes. All Hell is smaller than one pebble of your earthly world: but it is smaller than one atom of
this world, the Real World. Look at yon butterfly. If it swallowed all Hell, Hell would not be big
enough to do it any harm or to have any taste."
"It seems big enough when you're in it, Sir."
"And yet all loneliness, angers, hatreds, envies and itchings that it contains, if rolled into one single
experience and put into the scale against the least moment of the joy that is felt by the least in
Heaven, would have no weight that could be registered at all. Bad cannot succeed even in being
bad as truly as good is good. If all Hell's miseries together entered the consciousness of yon wee
yellow bird on the bough there, they would be swallowed up without trace, as if one drop of ink
had been dropped into that Great Ocean to which your terrestrial Pacific itself is only a molecule."
"I see," said I at last. "She couldn't fit into Hell."
He nodded. "There's not room for her," he said. "Hell could not open its mouth wide enough."
"And she couldn't make herself smaller?- like Alice, you know."
"Nothing like small enough. For a damned soul is nearly nothing: it is shrunk, shut up in itself.
Good beats upon the damned incessantly as sound waves beat on the ears of the deaf, but they
cannot receive it. Their fists are clenched, their teeth are clenched, their eyes fast shut. First they
will not, in the end they cannot, open their hands for gifts, or their mouths for food, or their eyes to
see."
"Then no one can ever reach them?"
"Only the Greatest of all can make Himself small enough to enter Hell. For the higher a thing is, the
lower it can descend-a man can sympathise with a horse but a horse cannot sympathise with a rat.
Only One has descended into Hell."
"And will He ever do so again?"
"It was not once long ago that He did it. Time does not work that way when once ye have left the
Earth. All moments that have been or shall be were, or are, present in the moment of His
descending. There is no spirit in prison to Whom He did not preach."
"And some hear him?"
"Aye."
"In your own books, Sir," said I, "you were a Universalist. You talked as if all men would be saved.
And St. Paul too."
"Ye can know nothing of the end of all things, or nothing expressible in those terms. It may be, as
the Lord said to the Lady Julian, that all will be well, and all will be well, and all manner of things
will be well. But it's ill talking of such questions."
"Because they are too terrible, Sir?"
"No. Because all answers deceive. If ye put the question from within Time and are asking about
possibilities, the answer is certain. The choice of ways is before you. Neither is closed. Any man
may choose eternal death. Those who choose it will have it. But if ye are trying to leap on into
eternity, if ye are trying to see the final state of all things as it will be (for so ye must speak) when
there are no more possibilities left but only the Real, then ye ask what cannot be answered to mortal
ears. Time is the very lens through which ye see-small and clear, as men see through the wrong end
of a telescope-something that would otherwise be too big for ye to see at all. That thing is Freedom:
the gift whereby ye most resemble your Maker and are yourselves parts of eternal reality. But ye
can see it only through the lens of Time, in a little clear picture, through the inverted telescope. It is
a picture of moments following one another and yourself in each moment making some choice that
might have been otherwise. Neither the temporal succession nor the phantom of what ye might
have chosen and didn't is itself Freedom. They are a lens. The picture is a symbol: but it's truer than
any philosophical theorem (or, perhaps, than any mystic's vision) that claims to go behind it. For
every attempt to see the shape of eternity except through the lens of Time destroys your knowledge
of Freedom. Witness the doctrine of Predestination which shows (truly enough) that eternal reality
is not waiting for a future in which to be real; but at the price of removing Freedom which is the
deeper truth of the two. And wouldn't Universalism do the same? Ye cannot know eternal reality by
a definition. Time itself, and all acts and events that fill Time, are the definition, and it must be
lived. The Lord said we were gods. How long could ye bear to look (without Time's lens) on the
greatness of your own soul and the eternal reality of her choice?" .
14.
AND SUDDENLY all was changed. I saw a great assembly of gigantic forms all motionless, all in
deepest silence, standing forever about a little silver table and looking upon it. And on the table
there were little figures like chessmen who went to and fro doing this and that. And I knew that
each chessman was the idolum or puppet representative of some one of the great presences that
stood by. And the acts and motions of each chessman were a moving portrait, a mimicry or
pantomime, which delineated the inmost nature of his giant master. And these chessmen are men
and women as they appear to themselves and to one another in this world. And the silver table is
Time. And those who stand and watch are the immortal souls of those same men and women. Then
vertigo and terror seized me and, clutching at my Teacher, I said, "Is that the truth? Then is all that
I have been seeing in this country false? These conversations between the Spirits and the Ghostswere
they only the mimicry of choices that had really been made long ago?"
"Or might ye not as well say, anticipations of a choice to be made at the end of all things? But ye'd
do better to say neither. Ye saw the choices a bit more clearly than ye could see them on earth: the
lens was clearer. But it was still seen through the lens. Do not ask of a vision in a dream more than
a vision in a dream can give."
"A dream? Then-then-am I not really here, Sir?"
"No, Son," said he kindly, taking my hand in his. "It is not so good as that. The bitter drink of death
is still before you. Ye are only dreaming. And if ye come to tell of what ye have seen, make it plain
that it was but a dream. See ye make it very plain. Give no poor fool the pretext to think ye are
claiming knowledge of what no mortal knows. I'll have no Sweden-borgs and no Vale Owens
among my children."
"God forbid, Sir," said I, trying to look very wise.
"He has forbidden it. That's what I'm telling ye." As he said this he looked more Scotch than ever. I
was gazing steadfastly on his face. The vision of the chessmen had faded, and once more the quiet
woods in the cool light before sunrise were about us. Then, still looking at his face, I saw there
something thatsent a quiver through my whole body. I stood at that moment with my back to the
East and the mountains, and he, facing me, looked towards them. His face flushed with a new light.
A fern, thirty yards behind him, turned golden. The eastern side of every tree-trunk grew bright.
Shadows deepened. All the time there had been bird noises, trillings, chatterings, and the like; but
now suddenly the full chorus was poured from every branch; cocks were crowing, there was music
of hounds, and horns; above all this ten thousand tongues of men and woodland angels and the
wood itself sang. "It comes! It comes!" they sang. "Sleepers awake! It comes, it comes, it comes."
One dreadful glance over my shoulder I essayed-not long enough to see (or did I see?) the rim
of the sunrise that shoots Time dead with golden arrows and puts to flight all phantasmal shapes.
Screaming, I buried my face in the folds of my Teacher's robe. "The morning! The morning!" I
cried, "I am caught by the morning and I am a ghost." But it was too late. The light, like solid
blocks, intolerable of edge and weight, came thundering upon my head. Next moment the folds of
my Teacher's garment were only the folds of the old ink-stained cloth on my study table which I
had pulled down with me as Ifell from my chair. The blocks of light were only the books which I
had pulled off with it, falling about my head. I awoke in a cold room, hunched on the floor beside a
black and empty grate, the clock striking three, and the siren howling overhead.

